[Cites
2
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Bihar vs Jawahar Lal Ram on 10 April, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
B.R. Gavai
NON-REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2629 OF 2023
                                  (Arising out of SLP(C) No.6944 of 2023)



                         THE STATE OF BIHAR AND OTHERS              …APPELLANT(S)

                                                   VERSUS

                         JAWAHAR LAL RAM AND OTHERS              …RESPONDENT(S)


                                                    WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2630 OF 2023
                                  (Arising out of SLP(C) No.6822 of 2023)



                                               JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   Leave granted.
2.   In the present appeals, the appellants have come to this

                         Court, being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 6 th
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
February 2023, passed by the Division Bench of the High
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.04.15
14:21:04 IST
Reason:
Court of Judicature at Patna vide which the judgment and
1
order 17th February 2020 passed by the learned Single Judge

of the High Court dismissing the writ petitions filed by the

respondents herein has been reversed.
3.   These appeals arise out of the peculiar facts and

circumstances.
4.   The parties are referred to herein as they are referred to

in the original writ petition being CWJC No. 22943 of 2018.
5.   The erstwhile Bihar Intermediate Education Council

(hereinafter referred to as the ‘Council’) had gone for

computerization and in pursuance thereof, the N.I.C.T.

Computering    System   Private   Limited   was   engaged   for

computerization work on contract basis.
6.   The original writ petitioners were initially taken on

service by N.I.C.T. and sent to the said Council for

computerization work. They continued to work for the

Council as employees of the said N.I.C.T. from 1999 to 2005.
7.   Since the writ petitioners were working for a period of

almost six years, the Council requested the Government to

create different posts in the Computer Section of the Council.

Accordingly, 63 posts came to be sanctioned in different

grades. In the meanwhile, the contract between N.I.C.T. and
2
the Council came to be terminated in the year 2005.

However, the respondents, who were earlier employees of the

N.I.C.T. came to be appointed against the sanctioned posts

by the Chairman of the Council.
8.   Subsequently, the Government of Bihar decided to

amalgamate Bihar School Education Examination Board

along with the said Council.             Accordingly, the Bihar

Intermediate   Education       Council     (Repeal)   Act,   2007

(hereinafter referred to as the “said Act”) was enacted. As per

the said Act, the Government of Bihar constituted a

Committee of three Secretaries to formulate the scheme for

regularization of the services of the employees, who were

working in the said Council.
9.   A scheme came to be framed for regularization under

the Government Resolution dated 12th July 2012. It appears

that, in terms of the said scheme, the services of the writ

petitioners came to be terminated on 18 th August 2017.

Being aggrieved thereby, the writ petitioners filed the writ

petition being CWJC No.12242 of 2017 before the High

Court. The learned Single Judge, vide order dated 18 th May

2018 partly allowed the writ petition and directed the State
3
Government to take a decision with regard to absorption of

the services of the writ petitioners.      Vide order dated 9 th

October   2018,   the   claim   of   the   writ   petitioners   for

regularization in service came to be rejected by the Education

Department. Being aggrieved thereby, the CWJC No.22943

of 2018 was filed. The learned Single Judge, vide order dated

17th February 2020 dismissed the same.            Being aggrieved

thereby, a Letters Patent Appeal being No. 180 of 2021 was

filed before the High Court by the original writ petitioners.

The same was allowed by the Division Bench of the High

Court. Hence, the present appeals.
10. We have heard Mr. Shyam Divan, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Shri

Dinesh Dwivedi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf

of the respondents-employees (writ petitioners).
11. Shri Shyam Divan submits that the reasoning given by

the Division Bench of the High Court is totally perfunctory.

He submits that the learned Single Judge, by an elaborate

well-reasoned order, found that the writ petitioners were not

entitled for absorption. He further submits that as per the

scheme, four conditions were required to be fulfilled and the
4
writ petitioners did not comply with the said conditions.

Finding this, the learned Single Judge dismissed the writ

petition. He submits that the Division Bench, however, on a

ground that, the report of the Committee was signed by only

one member and not all the three members, has erroneously

reversed the well-reasoned order passed by the learned

Single Judge. He further submits that the personal affidavit

filed   by   the   Additional   Chief   Secretary   of   the   State

Government dated 6th December 2022 would reveal that the

report of the Committee was accepted by the Cabinet of the

State of Bihar and as such, the reasoning that, the report

was not signed by all the three officers, is totally without

substance.
12. Shri Dinesh Dwivedi, on the contrary, submits that the

writ petitioners have been continuously working from 1999

till 2017. He submits that the writ petitioners have

continuously worked for a period of almost 18 years.             He

submits that all the writ petitioners complied with all the

four conditions, as stipulated in the Scheme of 2012.            He

further submits that the learned Single Judge, in the first

round of litigation, has also found that the writ petitioners
5
complied with all the four conditions.
13. In the peculiar facts and circumstances, we are not

inclined to go into the legal issues. At the outset, we may say

that we are not satisfied with the manner in which the

Division Bench has dealt with the matter in the present

litigation.   When the Division Bench was considering the

well-reasoned order passed by the learned Single Judge, the

least that was expected of it was to give reasonings as to why

it disagreed with the findings given by the learned Single

Judge.
14. Insofar as the finding of the Division Bench that the

report was not signed by three members is concerned, it

ought to have taken into consideration that much water had

flown subsequently, inasmuch as the affidavit of the

Additional Chief Secretary dated 6th December 2022 would

have shown that the report of the Committee was accepted

by the State Government, which was fructified in the scheme

dated 12th July 2012, which was published in the gazette

notification. As such, the High Court, at the most could have

examined the correctness of the scheme as notified in the

gazette notification.   It appears that the Division Bench
6
found an easy way to deal with the litigation.
15. In any case, if the directions as issued by the Division

Bench are to be complied with, it will lead to more than one

complications. The Division Bench has granted liberty to the

State Government to again start the process and in the

meantime directed the writ petitioners to be taken back to

work.    It has further directed honorary benefits to be

calculated and disbursed for the intervening period.
16. We are of the considered view that if the order, as

passed by the Division Bench, is permitted to continue, it will

give rise to third round of litigation and would not provide

any solace to the employees, who have been fighting for

justice from 2017.
17. The facts as recorded hereinabove would clearly show

that the writ petitioners have been working since 1999

continuously in the said Council, may be initially from 1999

to 2005 they were working as employees of N.I.C.T. However,

undisputedly they were working for the Council.
18. Subsequently, on account of the posts being sanctioned

by the State for the Council and the contract between the

Council and N.I.C.T. being terminated, they were absorbed
7
on the posts so sanctioned by the State Government.

Undisputedly, the appointment was issued by the Chairman

of the said Council, who was the competent authority.
19. On account of subsequent fortuitous development i.e.

the merger of the Council with the Board, the petitioners

became surplus and a scheme was required to be evolved for

their    absorption/regularization.   Finally,   a   scheme   was

finalized and notified in the Official Gazette on 12th July

2012.
20. Even after the scheme was notified in the year 2012, the

writ petitioners were permitted to continue to work till 2017

and only in the year 2017, their services came to be

terminated.
21. It could thus be seen that the writ petitioners have been

continuously working since 1999 i.e. much before the

judgment in the case of
Secretary, State of Karnataka

and Ors. v. Uma Devi
(3) and Others1, was delivered on 10th

April 2006.
22. Uprooting the writ petitioners at this stage of life would

have devastating effects on them as well as on their families.


1       (2006) 4 SCC 1
8
23. In that view of the matter, we find that, in the present

case, taking into consideration the peculiar facts and

circumstances of the case and without this being treated as a

precedent in any manner, a relief needs to be moulded so as

to do complete justice.
24. We are, therefore, inclined to exercise our extraordinary

powers under
Article 142
of the Constitution of India and

directed thus:
“The writ petitioners shall be absorbed on the

     posts on which they are appointed in the year

     2005. They would be permitted to rejoin with

     effect from 1st May 2023.       Though the writ

     petitioners would be entitled to continuity in

     service for all the purposes including retiral

     benefits, they would not be entitled for any

     backwages for the period during which they

     were out of employment.”
25. The appeals are disposed of in the above terms. Pending

application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
9
..............................J.
                                    (B.R. GAVAI)


                      ..............................J.
                          (ARAVIND KUMAR)
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 10, 2023
10