[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
District Bar Association Dehradun vs Ishwar Shandilya on 20 April, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
C.T. Ravikumar
REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       M.A. NO. 859 OF 2020
                                                    IN
                                     SLP (C) NO. 5440 OF 2020


                         District Bar Association Dehradun ...Petitioner(s)

                                                Versus


                         Ishwar Shandilya & Ors.            …Respondent(s)


                                              ORDER
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Present application has been preferred by the

                               Bar Council of India for appropriate direction

                               for   constitution   of   Grievance   Redressal

                               Committees (GRC) for redressal of grievances
Signature Not Verified         of Advocates/Bar Associations at different
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.04.20
16:17:34 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 8
levels   as   submitted    in   affidavit   dated

     15.09.2021 including directions to all the

     High Courts to constitute the suggested

     “Grievance Redressal Committees” for the

     States as well as Districts and Taluka courts

     within their respective territorial jurisdiction.
2.   Shri Manan Kumar Mishra, learned Senior

     Advocate and Chairman of the Bar Council of

     India submitted that in order to check and

     control the frequent strikes, boycotts, Bar

     Council of India has already filed affidavit in

     M.A. No. 859/2020 arising out of SLP (C) No.

     5440/2020 on 15.09.2021. The Council has

     suggested various measures for controlling

     the strike/abstention and has suggested the

     mechanism of redressal of the grievances of

     Advocates/Bar Associations at all levels. He
Page 2 of 8
has submitted that the Bar Council is of the

firm view and opinion that the illegal and

unreasonable strikes and boycott are always

bad and the Bar Councils can never approve

or encourage such practices. It is submitted

that    however,     in      a     meeting     of

Chairmen/Office Bearers of all the State Bar

Councils held, the Bar Council of India and

all the representatives of the lawyers were of

the unanimous opinion that there should be

a grievance redressal mechanism available to

Advocates    at    all    levels     from     the

Talukas/Muffasils/District       Courts,     High

Courts where the members of the Bar could

vent their grievances. It is submitted that

many a times, members of the Bar might

have very genuine grievances and due to non-

resolving of such genuine grievance, the
Page 3 of 8
members of the Bar go on strike. It is

     submitted that therefore, if the genuine

     grievance of the members of the Bar like any

     dissatisfaction because of the procedural

     changes in filing or listing of the matters in

     High   Courts   or   District   Courts   in   the

     respective States or any grievance pertaining

     to misbehave of any member of the lower

     judiciary or any other serious grievance

     against judicial officers can be ventilated

     before the Grievance Redressal Committees

     so that the members of the Bar who are also

     part of the justice delivery system may feel

     that their genuine grievances are heard and

     ventilated by some forum.
3.   Having heard Shri Manan Kumar Mishra,

     learned Senior Advocate and Chairman of the
Page 4 of 8
Bar Council of India, we once again reiterate

that no member of the Bar can go on strike

and/or abstain himself from court working.

Time and again, this Court has emphasised

and criticized the advocates going on strike

and abstaining them from work. If the

member of the Bar has any genuine grievance

or the difficulty being faced because of the

procedural changes in filing/listing of the

matters   and/or    any   genuine    grievance

pertaining to misbehave of any member of the

lower judiciary they can very well make a

representation and it is appropriate that their

genuine grievances are considered by some

forum so that such strikes can be avoided

and members of the Bar who might have

genuine grievances like above may ventilate

their grievances. Therefore, we request all the
Page 5 of 8
High      Courts      to   constitute      Grievance

Redressal Committee in their respective High

Courts which may be headed by the Chief

Justice    and     such    a   grievance   redressal

committee be consisting of two other senior

Judges, one each from service and one from

the Bar to be nominated by the Chief Justice

as well as the Advocate General, Chairman of

the Bar Council of the State and President of

the High Court Bar Association. The High

Court may also consider to constitute the

similar Grievance Redressal Committee at the

District Court level. It is observed that the

Grievance Redressal Committee may consider

the genuine grievance related to the difference

of   opinion     or   dissatisfaction   because   of

procedural changes in filing/listing of the

matters of the respective High Courts or any
Page 6 of 8
District Courts in their respective States and

     any    genuine        grievance   pertaining    to

     misbehave of any member of the lower

     judiciary, provided such grievance must be

     genuine and not to keep the pressure on any

     judicial   officer.    The   present   application

     stands disposed of in terms of the above. I.A.

     No. 51257/2023 shall also stand disposed of.
4.   Registry is directed to send the copies of this

     order to Registrar General of all the High

     Courts for further steps in terms of the

     present order.
………………………………….J.
                                   [M.R. SHAH]




                            ………………………………….J.
                           [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
Page 7 of 8
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 20, 2023
Page 8 of 8