[Cites
23
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Jhabbar Singh (D) By Lrs. Etc. vs Jagtar Singh on 17 April, 2023
Author:
Bela M. Trivedi
Bench:
Bela M. Trivedi
,
Ajay Rastogi
REPORTABLE

                                        IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                         CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1497 OF 2008


                      JHABBAR SINGH (DECEASED) THROUGH
                      LEGAL HEIRS & ORS.                                .....APPELLANTS

                                                   VERSUS

                      JAGTAR SINGH
                      S/o DARSHAN SINGH                                 .....RESPONDENT

                                                     WITH

                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1498 OF 2008


                      BALAK RAM
                      S/o SHRI SANTU & ORS.                               .....APPELLANTS

                                                      VERSUS

                      JAGTAR SINGH
                      S/o DARSHAN SINGH                                  .....RESPONDENT


                                                JUDGMENT
BELA M. TRIVEDI, J.
1.             Both the appeals arise out of the common judgment and order dated

                         17.08.2007 passed by the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at
Signature Not Verified   Chandigarh in RSA No.1470/1983 and RSA No. 1557/1983,
Digitally signed by
SONIA BHASIN
Date: 2023.04.17
15:05:44 IST
Reason:                  whereby the High Court, while allowing the said appeals filed by the

                         original plaintiff Jagtar Singh (predecessor of the present
1
respondent) decreed the Civil Suits no. 420/1981 and 421/1981,

     filed by him, seeking decree for the possession of the suit lands,

     claiming right of pre-emption against the original defendants

     Jhabbar Singh and others (the predecessor of the present

     appellants). The present appellants and respondent have been

     substituted as the legal heirs of the original defendant Jhabbar

     Singh and original plaintiff Jagtar Singh respectively.
2.   The factual matrix giving rise to the present appeals are as under: -
(2.1) The Civil Suit No. 420/1981 was filed by the plaintiff

           Jagtar Singh against the defendant Jhabbar Singh and

           others, with regard to the land admeasuring 12 bighas

           representing 240/819th share of the land admeasuring

           40 bighas 19 biswas, as detailed in para 1 of the plaint.
The said land was originally owned by one Jit Singh,

           who had sold the same for consideration of Rs. 46,500/-

           to the defendant Jhabbar Singh and others vide

           registered sale deed dated 07.04.1980.
(2.2) The Civil Suit no. 421/1981 was also filed by the plaintiff

           Jagtar Singh pertaining to the land admeasuring 10

           bighas 18 biswas representing 218/819th share of the

           land admeasuring 40 bighas and 19 biswas as detailed

           in para 1 of the plaint, originally owned by Jit Singh and
2
his wife Piar Kaur, who had sold the same for a

     consideration of Rs 42,500/- to the defendant Jhabbar

     Singh and others vide registered sale deed dated

     24.04.1980.
(2.3) On 06.04.1981, the plaintiff Jagtar Singh filed the said two

     suits seeking possession of the suit lands on the ground that

     he was having a superior right to pre-empt those sale deeds

     as the co-sharer in the joint khewat, however no notice of the

     sale was given to the plaintiff by the said owner Jit Singh. The

     defendants Jhabbar Singh and others resisted the suits

     denying the plaintiff’s claim of superior right of pre-emption.

(2.4) During the pendency of the said suits, on 25.05.1982, the

     defendant Jhabbar Singh filed a Partition case being no.

     78/TP before the Assistant Collector, Tehsil Pihowa, in which

     the plaintiff Jagtar Singh had filed his objections. The

     Assistant Collector, Tehsil, Kurukshetra passed the following

     order on 25.05.1982 as under: -
“…..Therefore, the objections placed by Jagtar
               Singh and others are rejected and the mode of
               partition which has already been prepared has
               been confirmed. Naksha Be is already annexed
               in the file because it has already been prepared.
               Therefore, the case is to be listed on 31.5.82 for
               objections as to Naksha Be”.
3
(2.5) Thereafter on 31.07.1982, the Assistant Collector, Tehsil,

     Pihowa passed the following order: -
“Today the file has been produced. Counsel of
                 parties are present, Patwari and Kanoongo are
                 also present who as per the earlier order have
                 provided for passage and boundaries of the
                 plots and about which the parties have been
                 explained. There was no passage for these
                 plots earlier. Even then passage has been given
                 from Khasra 802/1 and 806 from Village
                 Kamoda to Village Jyotisar which is connecting
                 these villages. Another passage is at the East
                 side after 4-5 acres and if these plots did not get
                 any other passages then this is the correct place
                 for such passage. As per Naksha Be of partition,
                 the partition is accepted the details of which is
                 as follows:
Name                   Number of Khasras allotted
      1.Jhabbar Singh, Balak Ram,        790/2-792/2-792/1/2-800
      Sardar Ram, Afsar Ram, Sher        2-16 3-14 0-4 4-0
      Singh, Santu S/o Shibbu all the    801     783/2 -802/1 – 806/1
      six portions are equal             4-0 0-6 3-16 3-16
                                         Total: 22 bigha 12 biswa



      2. Jagtar Singh, Pranav Singh,     788 – 789 -783/1-784
      Palvinder Singh, Tarsem Singh      3-8 4-11 3-14 4-0
      S/o Darshan Singh. All four        787
      portions are equal.                2-2
                                         Total: 17 bigha 15 biswa

     In addition to above for No.1         802/1-806-790/1-792/1
                                           0-4     0-4     0-2 x
For No.2                              792/1
0-2
                                           Total: 0-12 Biswa
Now the case is to be listed on 30/8/82 after expiry of time for
     appeal. Pronounced in Open Court.
31-7-82
                                                               Sd/-
A.C. Second Class
                                                              Pihova”
4
(2.6) It further emerges that thereafter the defendant Jhabbar Singh

     had filed an application before the Trial Court seeking an

     amendment in the written statement in the suits stating inter

     alia that during the pendency of the suits, the joint khata

     including the suit lands had been partitioned by the AC-I

     Grade, Pihowa vide order dated 31.07.1982. Consequent

     upon such amendment, an additional issue came to be

     framed by the trial court vide the order dated 28.09.1982 in

     the suits, as to “whether the suit land has been partitioned?”

(2.7) On 12.10.1982, the Collector Guhla dismissed the appeal filed

     by the said Jagtar Singh and Others against the order dated

     31.07.1982 passed by the Assistant Collector, Pihowa. On

     19.10.1982, the said Jagtar Singh had filed Revision

     application   before    the   Commissioner,      in   which   the

     Commissioner had initially granted stay against the operation

     of the order dated 31.07.1982 upto 16.11.1982, however the

     said stay was not extended thereafter.
(2.8) Both the suits being 420/1981 and 421/1981 came to be

     dismissed by the Civil Judge, SJIIC Kaithal vide the judgments

     and decrees dated 01.12.1982, holding inter alia that khewat

     in dispute had remained no more joint as per the order dated

     31.07.1982 and that the plaintiff had lost the joint status as the
5
co-sharer on the date of passing the judgment and decree.
The First Appeals preferred by the plaintiff Jagtar Singh also

           came to be dismissed by the Additional District Judge,

           Kurukshetra,    vide   the    judgment    and   decrees    dated

           08.04.1983.
(2.9) However, the RSA no. 1470/83 and RSA no. 1557/83

           preferred by the plaintiff Jagtar Singh against the said

           judgments and decrees of the First Appellate Court, came to

           be allowed by the High Court vide the impugned common

           judgment and order dated 17.08.2007.
3.   The learned senior counsel Mr. Narender Hooda appearing for the

     appellants (original defendants) placing reliance on the provisions

     contained in
Section 121
of the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887

     (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Revenue Act’) submitted that after

     the partition was completed, the function of the Revenue Officer to

     prepare an instrument of partition and fixing the date for taking effect

     of the partition was only an executory or ministerial act. As such

     “Naksha Be” having already been prepared when the Assistant

     Collector had passed the order, and the objections of the

     respondent (original plaintiff Jagtar Singh) with regard to the mode

     of partition having already been rejected vide his order dated

     25.05.1982, the said “Naksha Be” had stood confirmed, and
6
thereafter the said “Naksha Be” was to be treated as “Naksha

Zeem” for the final allocation of lands between the parties.

According to him, thereafter the Assistant Collector had passed the

order on 31.07.1982 accepting the partition, and the appeal against

the said order preferred by Jagtar Singh before the Collector was

dismissed on 12.10.1982, and therefore the right of pre-emption

even if had existed in favour of the plaintiff Jagtar Singh on the date

of filing of the suits, did not survive on the date of passing of the

decrees in the civil suits on 01.12.1982. He further submitted that

the right of pre-emption under the
Punjab Pre-emption Act, 1913
(hereinafter referred to as the ‘
Pre-emption Act
’) is a weak kind of

right, and as per the settled legal position, the right of pre-emption

should not only exist on the date of filing of the suits, but has to

subsist on the date of passing of decree also. Mr. Hooda has placed

reliance on the decisions of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Har Devi vs. Ram Jas and Others
(1974 PLJ 345);
Lala Ram vs.

The Financial Commissioner, Haryana
(1991 SCC Online P&H

1105);
Pritam Singh Vs. Jaskaur Singh
(1992 SCC Online P&H
676) and Munshi vs. The Financial Commissioner, Haryana,

Chandigarh
(1993 SCC Online P&H 1086) to buttress his

submissions.
7
4.   Per contra, the learned senior counsel, Mr. Rajiv Bhalla appearing

     for the respondent repelling the submissions made on behalf of the

     appellants submitted that as per Section 121 of the Revenue Act,

     the partition comes into effect on a date to be notified by the

     Assistant Collector in the instrument of partition and not on the date

     of preparation of “Naksha Be” or “Naksha Zeem”. According to him,

     the said date is significant for the purpose of determining the liability

     of the parties to pay the revenue and also for recording the

     ownership rights in the record of rights. Mr. Bhalla relied upon the

     various proformas contained in the Haryana Land Records Manual,

     2013 to submit that the partition and severance of status of the co-

     sharer could be notified by the Assistant Collector only in

     accordance with Section 121 of the Revenue Act and Clauses 18.12

     to 18.14 of the Manual. Distinguishing the judgments relied upon by

     the learned senior counsel Mr. Hooda for the appellants, learned

     senior counsel, Mr. Bhalla submitted that in the said cases, the

     status of co-sharer had come to an end on the date set out in the

     instrument of partition, whereas in the instant case neither the

     instrument of partition was prepared, nor the date was determined

     by the Assistant Collector as per Section 121 of the Revenue Act,

     and therefore it could not be said that the proceedings of partition

     had stood concluded before the date of decrees passed in the suits.
8
Placing reliance upon the judgment of this Court in case of
Bishan

          Singh & Others vs. Khazan Singh & Another1
he submitted that

          the right of pre-emption is a right of substitution and not a right of

          re-purchase and therefore the plaintiff was not required to challenge

          in the suits, the sale deeds executed in favour of the appellants-

          defendants.
5.        For the better appreciation of the rival contentions raised by the

          learned counsel for the parties, it would be beneficial to refer to

          some of the provisions contained in the Pre-emption Act and the

          Revenue Act.
Section 4
of the Pre-emption Act pertains to the right

          of pre-emption which reads as under:
“4. Right of pre-emption application of - The right of
                      pre-emption shall mean the right of a person to acquire
                      agricultural land or village immoveable property or
                      urban immoveable property in preference to other
                      persons, and it arises in respect of such land only in
                      the case of sales and in respect of such property only
                      in the case of -sales or of foreclosures of the right to
                      redeem such property.
Nothing in this section shall prevent a Court
                      from holding that an alienation purporting to be other
                      than a sale is in effect a sale.”
6.
Section 15
deals with vesting of right of pre-emption in favour of

          certain categories of persons. The relevant part thereof is

          reproduced as under: -
1
AIR 1958 SC 838
9
“15. Persons in whom right of pre-emption vests in
                 respect of sales of agricultural land and village
                 immovable property ~

                 (1) The right of pre-emption in respect of agricultural
                      land and village immovable property shall vest-
(a)…….
(b) Where the sale is of a share out of joint land or
                    property and is not made by all the co-sharers jointly,
-
First, in the sons or daughters or sons' sons or
                    daughters' sons of the vendor or vendors;
Secondly, in the brothers or brother's sons of the
                    vendor or vendors;
Thirdly, in the father’s brother or father’s brother’s
                    sons of the vendor or vendor’s;
Fourthly, in the other co-shares;
Fifthly, in the tenants who hold under tenancy of the
                    vendor or vendor the land or property sold or a part
                    thereof;
(c)…….”
7.   The procedure for giving notice to the pre-emptor has been
laid

     down in
Section 19
and the procedure for giving notice by the pre-

     emptor to the vendor has been
laid down in
Section 20
.
Section 21
of the Pre-emption Act states that any person entitled to a right of

     pre-emption may, when the sale or foreclosure has been completed,

     bring a suit to enforce that right.
8.   So far as the provisions contained in the
Punjab Land Revenue Act
,

     are concerned, Chapter IX thereof pertains to the “Partition”. As per

     Section 111 thereof, the application for partition could be made by

     any joint owner of land or any joint tenant of a tenancy in which a

     right of occupancy subsists, to the Revenue Officer in the

     circumstances mentioned therein. The procedure to be followed by
10
the Revenue Officer on receiving the application under Section 111

      is
laid down in
Sections 113 to 120.
9.    Section 118 pertaining to the disposal of other questions and to the

      Appeal reads as under: -
“118. Disposal of other question: -(1) When there
                 is a question as to the property to be divided, or the
                 mode of making a partition, the Revenue-officer
                 shall, after, such injury as he deems necessary,
                 record an order stating his decision on the question
                 and his reasons for the decision.
(2) An appeal may be preferred from an order under
                 sub-section (1) within fifteen days from the date
                 thereof, and, when such an appeal is preferred and
                 the institution thereof has been certified to the
                 revenue-officer by the [authority to whom the appeal
                 has been preferred] the Revenue-officer shall stay
                 proceeding pending the disposal of the appeal.
                 (3)……
                 (4)……”
10.   Section 121 which pertains to the instrument of partition, being

      relevant for our purpose is reproduced as under:
“121. Instrument of partition: - When a partition is
                 completed, the Revenue-officer shall cause an
                 instrument of partition to be prepared, and the date on
                 which the partition is to take effect to be recorded
                 therein.”
11.   Section 123 pertains to the affirmation of partition made without the

      intervention of the Revenue Officer which reads as under:
11
“123. Affirmation of partition privately affected: -
(1) In any case in which a partition has been made
                  without the intervention of a Revenue-officer, and party
                  thereto may apply to a Revenue-officer for an order
                  affirming the partition.
(2) On receiving the application, the Revenue-officer
                  shall inquire into the case, and, if he finds that the
                  partition has in fact been made, he may make an order
                  affirming it and proceed under section 119, 120, 121
                  and 122, or any of those sections, as circumstances
                  may require, in the same manner as if the partition had
                  been made on an application to himself under this
                  Chapter.”
12.   At the outset, it may be noted that the plaintiff Jagtar Singh, the

      predecessor of the present respondent, had filed the suits claiming

      himself to be the co-sharer in the joint khewat along with the vendor

      Jit Singh, and had sought relief against the defendant Jhabbar

      Singh and others with regard to the possession of the suit lands, on

      the ground that he as a co-sharer had a superior right to pre-empt

      the sales, and that he was not put to any notice of sale of the suit

      lands on or before the date of such sales. In a very loosely drafted

      plaint, the plaintiff had neither pleaded as to how he was the co-

      sharer, nor had he impleaded the said Jit Singh, the owner of the

      suit lands, with whom he claimed to be the co-sharer, and who had

      sold the suit lands to the defendants Jhabbar Singh and Others. It

      is needless to say that in a suit for pre-emption, the vendor i.e., the

      owner of the suit land who had allegedly not given any notice of sale

      to the plaintiff as required to be given under
Section 19
of the Pre-
12
emption Act and against whom the right to pre-empt the sale is

          claimed would be a proper party if not a necessary party, for a

          complete and final adjudication on the issues involved in the suit.
13.       As held by this Court in
U.P. Awas Evam Vikas Parishad vs. Gyan

          Devi2
, necessary party is one without whom no order can be made

          effectively; and a proper party is one in whose absence an effective

          order can be made but whose presence is necessary for a complete

          and final decision on the question involved in the proceedings.

          When a right to pre-empt the sale was claimed by the plaintiff Jagtar

          Singh as a co-sharer in the lands along with the owner Jit Singh,

          alleging that the mandatory provisions contained in
Section 19
i.e.,

          for giving notice to the pre-emptor, was not complied with by the

          owner or seller Jit Singh, his presence as the party defendant was

          desirable along with the other defendants Jhabbar Singh and

          Others, to effectively and finally decide the disputes between the

          parties. Though, Order I, Rule 9 states that no suit shall be defeated

          by reasons of the misjoinder or non-joinder of parties, care must be

          taken by the court to ensure that all the parties, be it the plaintiff or

          the defendant, whose presence is necessary for complete and final

          adjudication on the issues involved in the suit, are before the court.
2
AIR 1995 SC 724
13
That is the reason why the courts are empowered to strike out or

      add parties, at any stage of the proceedings as per Order I, Rule

      10, C.P.C.
14.   Further, having regard to the absolutely sketchy and loosely drafted

      plaint in the instant case, the Court is tempted to regurgitate the

      basic and cardinal rule of pleadings contained in Order VI, Rule2(1)

      of the Code, according to which every pleading (i.e., plaint or written

      statement) has to contain a statement in concise form of the

      material facts on which the party pleading relies for his claim or

      defence, as the case may be. Of course, the pleading need not

      contain the evidence by which such material facts are to be proved,

      nonetheless the facts necessary to formulate a complete cause of

      action i.e., the material facts must be stated. Omission of a single

      material fact would lead to an incomplete cause of action and
in that

      case
, the statement of claim would become bad in the eye of law.
15.   Now, so far as the right of pre-emption is concerned, it may be noted

      that it is a very weak right and could be defeated by all legitimate

      methods. This Court as back as in 1958, in case of
Bishan Singh

      and Others vs. Khazan Singh & Another
(supra), had set-forth

      the contours of the right of pre-emption. It was opined therein by the

      four-Judge Bench that-
14
“11…..The right of pre-emption is not a right to the thing
                        sold but a right to the offer of a thing about to be sold.
                        This right is called the primary or inherent right. (2) The
                        pre-emptor has a secondary right or a remedial right to
                        follow the thing sold. (3) It is a right of substitution but
                        not of re-purchase i. e., the pre-emptor takes the entire
                        bargain and steps into the shoes of the original vendee.
                        (4) It is a right to acquire the whole of the property sold
                        and not a share of the property sold. (5) Preference
                        being the essence of the right, the plaintiff must have a
                        superior right to that of the vendee or the person
                        substituted in his place. (6) The right being a very weak
                        right, it can be defeated by all legitimate methods, such
                        as the vendee allowing the claimant of a superior or
                        equal right being substituted in his place.”
16.       The afore-stated position was reiterated by this Court in
Barasat

          Eye Hospital vs. Kaustabh Mondal3
, and again in the recent

          decision in case of Raghunath (Dead) by LRs. vs. Radha Mohan

          (Dead) Through LRs. And Others4, wherein it has been observed

          as under: -
“14. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the
                        aforesaid issue and in order to determine the same, we
                        had, at the inception itself, set out the judgment
                        in
Barasat       Eye    Hospital
case [
Barasat      Eye
                        Hospital v. Kaustabh Mondal
, (2019) 19 SCC 767 :
(2020) 4 SCC (Civ) 810] . We have, thus, referred to
                        the earlier judicial view in para 10 of the judgment
                        extracted aforesaid. The historical perspective of the
                        right of pre-emption shows that it owes its origination
                        to the advent of the Mohammedan rule, based on
                        customs, which came to be accepted in various courts
                        largely located in the north of India. The pre-emptor has
                        been held by the judicial pronouncements to have two
                        rights. Firstly, the inherent or primary right, which is the
                        right to the offer of a thing about to be sold and the
                        secondary or remedial right to follow the thing sold. It
                        is a secondary right, which is simply a right of
                        substitution in place of the original vendee. The pre-
emptor is bound to show that he not only has a right as
3
(2019) 19 SCC 767
4
(2021) 12 SCC 501
15
good as that of the vendee, but it is superior to that of
                       the vendee; and that too at the time when the pre-
emptor exercises his right. In our view, it is relevant to
                       note this observation and we once again emphasise
                       that the right is a “very weak right” and is, thus, capable
                       of being defeated by all legitimate methods including
                       the claim of superior or equal right.”
17.        At this juncture, it would be also apt to mention that apart from the

          fact that the right of pre-emption is very weak right and capable of

          being defeated by all legitimate methods, the pre-emptor must

          establish that he had the right to pre-empt on the date of sale, on

          the date of the filing of the suit and on the date of the passing of the

          decree by the Court of the first instance. The pre-emptor or the

          claimant-plaintiff who claims the right to pre-empt the sale on the

          date of sale, has also to prove that such right continued to subsist

          till the passing of the decree of the first court. If the claimant-plaintiff

          loses that right or the vendee improves his right equal or above the

          right of the claimant before the adjudication of the suit, the suit for

          pre-emption would fail.
18.       This proposition of law has been well settled by this Court since

          1971, in case of
Bhagwan Das (Dead) by LRS and Others vs.

          Chet Ram5
.
In the said case, this Court had approved the full bench

          decision of Punjab High Court in Ramji Lal and Another vs. The
5
1971 (1) SCC 12
16
State of Punjab and Others6, which had ruled that a pre-emptor

          must maintain his qualification to pre-empt upto the date of the

          decree.
19.       The Constitution Bench in case of
Shyam Sunder and Others vs.

          Ram Kumar and Another7
also while examining the issues

          whether in a suit for pre-emption, the pre-emptor should possess

          his right to pre-empt on the date of sale and on the date of the

          decree of the First Court, and whether the loss of that right after the

          date of decree either by his own act or by an act beyond his control

          or by any subsequent change in the legislation which is prospective

          in operation during the pendency of the appeal filed against the

          decree of the Court of First instance, would affect the right of the

          pre-emptor or not, has laid down certain principles, after making

          analysis of various decisions including the decision of the Full

          Bench rendered by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Ramji

          Lal vs. State of Punjab
(supra).
“10. On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions
                       referred to in first category of decisions, the legal
                       principles that emerge are these:
1. The pre-emptor must have the right to pre-empt on
                       the date of sale, on the date of filing of the suit and on
6
AIR 1966 P&H 374
7
(2001) 8 SCC 24
17
the date of passing of the decree by the Court of the
                   first instance only.
2. The pre-emptor who claims the right to pre-empt the
                   sale on the date of the sale must prove that such right
                   continued to subsist till the passing of the decree of
                   the first court. If the claimant loses that right or a
                   vendee improves his right equal or above the right of
                   the claimant before the adjudication of suit, the suit for
                   pre-emption must fail.
3. A pre-emptor who has a right to preempt a sale on
                   the date of institution of the suit and on the date of
                   passing of decree, the loss of such right subsequent
                   to the decree of the first court would not affect his right
                   or maintainability of the suit for pre- emption.
4. A pre-emptor who after proving his right on the date
                   of sale, on the date of filing the suit and on the date of
                   passing of the decree by the first court, has obtained
                   a decree for preemption by the Court of first instance,
                   such right cannot be taken away by subsequent
                   legislation during pendency of the appeal filed against
                   the decree unless such legislation has retrospective
                   operation.”
20.   In the light of the afore-stated legal position, let us examine whether

      the pre-emptor i.e., plaintiff Jagtar Singh had established his

      superior right of pre-emption all through out from the date of the

      execution of the sale deeds by the original owner – vendor Jit Singh,

      till the date of filing of the suit as also till the date of passing of the

      decree by the court of the first instance.
21.   Recapitulating the facts, it appears that the said plaintiff Jagtar

      Singh, the predecessor of the present respondent, had filed the

      suits on 06.04.1981 claiming his superior right to pre-empt the sale

      on the ground of being co-sharer in the joint Khewat alleging inter-
18
alia in the plaint that the original owner of the suit lands Jit Singh

      had executed the registered sale deeds on 07.04.1980 and

      24.04.1980 in favour of the defendants Jhabbar Singh and others,

      predecessors of the present appellants, without giving any notice to

      the plaintiff. Since it was not disputed that the plaintiff Jagtar Singh

      was the co-sharer in the joint Khewat as per the Jamabandi for the

      year 1978-1979 (exhibit P-1), it could be safely held that the plaintiff

      had the right of pre-emption on the date of execution of the sale

      deeds in question and also on the date of filing of the suits.
22.   However, the core issue that has fallen for consideration before us

      is, whether the plaintiff Jagtar Singh had the right to pre-empt on the

      date of passing of the decree by the trial court i.e. on 01.12.1982.
23.   As stated earlier, pending the suits, the defendant Jhabbar Singh

      had filed a Partition case being no. 78/TP in respect of lands in

      question before the Assistant Collector, in which the plaintiff Jagtar

      Singh had filed his objections. The Assistant Collector vide the order

      dated 25.05.1982 had rejected the objections of Jagtar Singh and

      had listed the case on 31.05.1982 for the objections as to the

      “Naksha Be”, which was already prepared and annexed to the file.

      As transpiring from the record, on 31.07.1982, the Assistant

      Collector in presence of the parties provided for the passage and

      the boundaries of the plots, and passed the order giving details of
19
partition as per the “Naksha Be”, mentioning as to which of the

      khasara numbers would be allotted to Jhabbar Singh and which to

      Jagtar Singh.
24.   The trial court after discussing various decisions of the Punjab and

      Haryana High Court held that the Khewat in dispute had remained

      no more joint as per the order dated 31.07.1982 passed by the

      Assistant Collector, and that the plaintiff had lost his status of a co-

      sharer on that date. Therefore, according to the trial court, the

      plaintiff did not possess the status of the co-sharer on the date of

      decree. The First Appellate Court in the appeals preferred by the

      plaintiff Jagtar Singh, also while confirming the judgments and

      decrees passed by the trial court and dismissing the appeals of the

      plaintiff held vide judgment and decree dated 08.04.1983 that the

      joint relationship between the parties had come to an end as soon

      as the order dated 31.07.1982 was passed by the Assistant

      Collector, and that the plaintiff had ceased to be the co-sharer in the

      land in dispute.
25.   However, the High Court in the Second appeals preferred by the

      original plaintiff Jagtar Singh reversed the concurrent findings

      recorded by the two courts below and allowed the second appeals,

      holding inter alia that on the date of the passing of the decree, no

      instrument of partition was drawn by the Revenue Officer, and
20
therefore it could not be said that the joint status of the parties had

          come to an end or that the plaintiff had lost his superior right of pre-

          emption. The High Court while passing the impugned order had

          followed its earlier judgment in
Pritam Singh vs. Jaskaur Singh8
.
26.       In our opinion, it is difficult to subscribe the view taken by the High

          Court in the impugned order that since no instrument of partition was

          drawn on the date of passing of the decree by the trial court, the

          joint status of the parties had not come to an end. Having duly

          considered the provisions contained in the
Punjab Land Revenue

          Act
and also the Haryana Land Records Manual placed on record

          by the learned counsel for the parties, it clearly emerges that as per
Section 118
of the Land Revenue Act, when there is a question as

          to the property to be divided, or the mode of making a partition, the

          Revenue Officer after such inquiry as he deems necessary, is

          required to record an order stating his decision on the question and

          record his reasons for the decision. Sub
section 2
of Section 118

          provides for an appeal to be preferred from decision of the Revenue

          Officer on the question of property to be divided, or the mode of

          making the partition. As such, there is no further appeal provided

          against the order in appeal passed under Section 118(2) of the Land
8
1992 SCC online P&H 676
21
Revenue Act. Section 119 deals with the administration of the

      property excluded from partition referred to in Clause 2 of Section

      112, with which we are not concerned. Section 120 deals with the

      provisions with regard to the distribution of revenue and rent after

      the partition.
27.   The relevant Section 121 states that when the partition is completed,

      the Revenue Officer shall cause an instrument of partition to be

      prepared, and the date on which the partition is to take effect to be

      recorded therein. If the said provision contained in Section 121 is

      closely read, it clearly appears that it deals with the procedure to be

      followed by the Revenue Officer, after the partition is completed.

      Meaning thereby, the Revenue Officer after the Partition is

      completed, has to cause an instrument of partition to be prepared

      and record therein the date on which the partition is to take effect.

      Therefore, when the inquiry as contemplated in Section 118 on the

      question as to the property to be divided, or the mode of making

      partition is made by the Revenue Officer, and an order stating his

      decision on the question along with the reasons for such decision is

      passed, the partition is deemed to have completed, subject to the

      decision of appeal that may be preferred against such order as

      contemplated in sub-
section 2
of Section 118.
22
28.   It is pertinent to note that
Section 117
of the Punjab Land Revenue

      Act confers discretion upon the Revenue Officer to decide the

      question as to the title in any property of which the partition is

      sought, either by himself or to refer the question to be determined

      by the competent court. Thus, the jurisdiction of the Revenue Officer

      in the cases of partition is concurrent with that of the civil court.

      Therefore, for the purpose of interpreting
Section 121
of the Land

      Revenue Act, the Court can safely draw an analogy from the

      provisions contained in
Order XX, Rule 18 C.P.C
. which pertain to

      the procedure to be followed on the passing of the decree for the

      partition of the property. The said provision reads as under :-
“18. Decree in suit for partition of property or
                     separate possession of a share therein.—
                     Where the Court passes a decree for the partition
                     of property or for the separate possession of a
                     share therein, then,—

                     (1) if and in so far as the decree relates to an estate
                     assessed to the payment of revenue to the
                     Government, the decree shall declare the rights of
                     the several parties interested in the property, but
                     shall direct such partition or separation to be made
                     by the Collector, or any gazetted subordinate of the
                     Collector deputed by him in this behalf, in
                     accordance with such declaration and with the
                     provisions of
section 54
;
(2) if and in so far as such decree relates to any
                     other immovable property or to movable property,
                     the Court may, if the partition or separation cannot
                     be conveniently made without further inquiry, pass
                     a preliminary decree declaring the rights of the
                     several parties interested in the property and giving
                     such further directions as may be required.”
23
29.       This Court in case of
Shub Karan Bubna Alias Shub Karan

          Prasad Bubna v. Sita Saran Bubna and Others9
, had an occasion

          to deal with the said provisions contained in Order XX, Rule 18, and

          it was observed as under:-
“7. …. In a suit for partition or separation of a share,
                             the court at the first stage decides whether the plaintiff
                             has a share in the suit property and whether he is
                             entitled to division and separate possession. The
                             decision on these two issues is exercise of a judicial
                             function and results in first stage decision termed as
                             “decree” under Order 20 Rule 18(1) and termed as
                             “preliminary decree” under Order 20 Rule 18(2) of the
                             Code. The consequential division by metes and
                             bounds, considered to be a ministerial or administrative
                             act requiring the physical inspection, measurements,
                             calculations         and       considering       various
                             permutations/combinations/alternatives of division is
                             referred to the Collector under Rule 18(1) and is the
                             subject-matter of the final decree under Rule 18(2).”
30.       If the said analogy is applied to the provisions contained in the
Punjab Land Revenue Act
pertaining to the Partition, we are of the

          opinion that when a decision is taken by the Revenue Officer under

          Section 118 on the question as to the property to be divided and the

          mode of partition, the rights and status of the parties stand decided

          and the partition is deemed to have completed. At this stage, such

          decision is required to be treated as the “decree”. The consequential
9
(2009) 3 SCC (Civ) 820
24
action of preparing the instrument of partition as contemplated in
Section 121
of the Land Revenue Act would be only ministerial or

      administrative act to be carried out to completely dispose of the

      partition case instituted before the Revenue Officer. Hence, once

      the decision on the property to be divided and on the mode of

      partition is taken by the Revenue Officer under Section 118, the joint

      status of the parties would stand severed on the date of such

      decision, subject to the decision in appeal if any preferred by the

      party. The consequential action of drawing an instrument of partition

      would follow thereafter. Hence, merely because the instrument of

      partition was not drawn, it could not be said that the partition was

      not completed or that the joint status of the parties was not severed.
31.   The first part of
Section 121
of the Land Revenue Act states that

      “when a partition is completed”. Meaning thereby, when the issue

      with regard to the properties to be divided and the mode of making

      partition stand decided and rights of the parties stand determined

      by the Revenue Officer, the latter part of Section 121 for preparing

      the instrument of partition and recording the date of partition would

      come into play. Such actions required to be taken as contained in

      the latter part of Section 121, would be only an executory work or

      administrative act to be carried out for completely disposing of the

      partition case instituted by the party before the Revenue Officer.
25
Just as in case of a decree in civil suit, the adjudication conclusively

      decides the rights of the parties with regard to the matter in

      controversy, however the decree would be preliminary when further

      proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be completely

      disposed of. In the same way, when the decision is taken by the

      Revenue Officer under Section 118, the partition would stand

      completed, the joint status of the parties would stand severed and

      would remain no more joint, after the period of limitation prescribed

      under the Act. The further proceeding to draw an instrument of

      partition would be only an executory or ministerial work to be carried

      out to completely dispose of the partition case.
32.   So far as the facts of the present case are concerned, the Assistant

      Collector i.e., concerned Revenue Officer vide the order dated

      25.05.1982 had rejected the objections raised by the plaintiff Jagtar

      Singh and others with regard to the mode of partition and had

      confirmed the mode of partition accordingly. On that day, the

      “Naksha Be” was already annexed to the file and the case was listed

      on 31.05.1982 for hearing the objections as to the “Naksha Be”. On

      31.07.1982, the Assistant Collector passed the order stating inter

      alia that the Patwari and Kanungo were present, and they had

      explained the parties about the passage and the boundaries of the

      plots, and that as per “Naksha Be”, the partition was accepted. The
26
details of the number of khasras allotted to both the parties i.e., to

Jhabbar Singh and others and to Jagtar Singh were also mentioned

in the said order. The partition having been accepted as per the said

“Naksha Be”, the joint status of the parties had stood severed. Of

course, the said order dated 31.07.1982 was challenged by the

plaintiff Jagtar Singh by way of an appeal before the Collector who

vide the order dated 12.10.1982 had dismissed the same. The said

order of Collector was further challenged by the said Jagtar Singh

by filing revision application before the Commissioner. Though, the

Commissioner had initially granted stay against the operation of the

order dated 31.07.1982 upto 16.11.1982, admittedly the said stay

was not further extended thereafter. Under the circumstances, the

joint status of the parties had come to an end on 31.07.1982, when

the Assistant Collector passed the order and when the same was

confirmed by the Collector on 19.10.1982. The trial court and the

appellate court, under the circumstances, had rightly held that the

plaintiff Jagtar Singh did not possess the status of co-sharer on the

date of decree i.e., on 01.12.1982, and that his right of pre-emption

had not survived till the date of passing of the decree in the suits. In

our opinion, the High Court had grossly erred in misinterpreting the

provisions of Punjab Pre-emption Act and of Land Revenue Act, and
27
in setting aside the judgments and decrees passed by the trial court

      and the appellate court.
33.   In that view of the matter, the impugned common order passed by

      the High Court deserves to be quashed and set aside and is

      accordingly set aside. Both the appeals stand allowed accordingly.
…..................................J.
                                                           [AJAY RASTOGI]



                                                 …..................................J.
                                                       [BELA M. TRIVEDI]
NEW DELHI;
17.04.2023
28