[Cites
3
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Amresh Kumar Sinha vs The State Of Bihar on 25 April, 2023
Author:
Pankaj Mithal
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
B.R. Gavai
1


                                                                             Non-reportable

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL NOs.            OF 2023
                           [Arising out of SLP(C)NOs.8219-8226 of 2019]


          AMRESH KUMAR SINGH & ORS.ETC.ETC.                              … APPELLANTS

                                                   VERSUS

          THE STATE OF BIHAR & ORS.ETC.ETC.                             … RESPONDENTS

                                                   WITH

                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO.       OF 2023
                                 [Arising out of SLP(C)NO.9666 of 2019]

                                                   WITH

                                 CIVIL APPEAL NOs.        OF 2023
                          [Arising out of SLP(C)NOs.11772-11773 of 2019]



                                           J   U   D   G    M   E   N    T



          PANKAJ MITHAL, J.
1.              Leave granted.
2.              Heard    Shri   Navniti   Prasad       Singh,    learned   Senior
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
NIRMALA NEGI
Date: 2023.04.26
16:04:45 IST
Reason:
Advocate leading the arguments on behalf of the
2
appellants, Mr. Saket Singh and Mr.Samir Ali Khan,

     learned counsel appearing for the State of Bihar.
3.   These appeals have been preferred by the appellants

     as    against   the    common      judgment    and    order   dated

     05.02.2019 of the Division Bench of the High Court

     of Judicature at Patna whereby the Letter Patent

     Appeals (LPAs) of the respondents have been allowed

     and the judgment and order of the learned Single

     Judge dated 28.11.2017 allowing the writ petitions

     has been set aside.
4.   The appellants were appointed as Accounts Clerks

     where the minimum qualification was intermediate.

     The    cadre    of    Junior    Accounts      Clerk    and    Senior

     Accounts Clerk which existed prior to 1980 merged

     with effect from 1st May, 1980 and a common cadre of

     Accounts Clerk came into existence.                   In 1999, the

     demerger of the cadre took place and the Clerks came

     to be retained in their respective cadres without

     any promotional avenues.
3
5.   The appellants invoked the writ jurisdiction of the

     court seeking benefit of Assured Career Progression

     (ACP) on completion of 12 years of service to avoid

     stagnation.
6.   The writ court extended the benefit of ACP to the

     appellants keeping in view the earlier decisions of

     the High Court in CWJC Nos.18015/2011 Pramod Kumar

     vs. The State of Bihar and Others and 16346/2011
Ashok Kumar & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar and Ors
.
7.   In    appeals,     the   Division       Bench        accepted   the

     contention    of   the   State    of    Bihar    that     for   the

     purposes of grant of ACP as per the rules, the

     qualification of graduation is sine qua non which is

     not possessed by the appellants.          Therefore, it held

     that the writ court committed an error in extending

     the benefit of ACP to the appellants who were not

     eligible and qualified for the purpose.
8.   Upon hearing the rival contentions of the parties,

     the    sole      question       which     arises         for    our

     reconsideration     in   these    appeals       is    whether   the
4
qualification of graduation prescribed for promotion

     to the next higher post of Accounts Officer from that

     of Accounts Clerk is necessary even for the purpose

     of extending the benefit of ACP.
9.   The Bihar Accounts Service Rules, 2000 as notified

     on 28th March, 2000 vide Rules 17 and 20 read with

     Schedule I thereof provides for recruitment by way

     of promotion. The aforesaid Rule 17, inter alia,

     provides that for promotion on the basis of grade of

     service,      candidates     must    possess    qualifications

     mentioned in Schedule I which, inter alia, provides

     that for promotion to Bihar Accounts Service, the

     minimum       educational         qualification      shall   be

     graduation.
10. At     the   same   time    Bihar    State    Employees   Service

     Condition (Assured Career Progression Scheme) Rules,

     2003 vide sub-Rule (5) of Rule 4 lays down that if

     the   rules    prescribe     passing    of    the   departmental

     examination or any qualification for promotion that

     shall also be an essential condition for sanction of
5
benefit under the scheme. In other words, possession

    of    essential   qualification    prescribed     under   the

    rules is necessary for grant of benefit under the

    scheme, i.e., ACP.
11. It is in view of the above rules, the contention of

    the State is that until and unless the Accountant

    Clerks      possess      the       minimum      educational

    qualifications of graduation, they are not entitled

    to promotion in the grade of Bihar Accounts Service

    that is the Accounts Officer.
12. It may be worth noting that the ACP scheme was

    enforced on the recommendation of the Fifth Central

    Pay    Commission   in   context   with   Group    C   and   D

    employees and it provided monetary benefit to the

    employees on completion of 12 years and 24 years of

    regular service who were not able to get promotion.

    The scheme as such was anti-stagnation and envisages

    merely placement of the employees in the higher pay

    scale for the grant of financial upgradation only

    without grant of actual promotion.           The benefit of
6
the ACP as such is like granting non-functional in

    situ promotion.
13. At the cost of repetition, it must be borne in mind

    that the object of ACP is to avoid stagnation where

    no promotional avenues are available.         The grant of

    ACP is not technically a grant of promotion but

    increase in the pay scale to the next higher grade

    retaining the employee on the post held by him.          This

    is only to accord monetary benefit without disturbing

    any seniority or actually effectuating promotion to

    any higher post to avoid stagnation on a particular

    post or pay scale for a very long period.
14. The object and purpose of ACP/MACP Scheme has been

    reiterated by this Court in
Union of India & Others

    Vs. C.R. Madhava Murthy & Anr.
(2022) 6 SCC 183, as

    one   to   relieve   the   frustration   on    account     of

    stagnation and it does not involve actual grant of

    promotional post but merely monetary benefits in the

    form of next higher grade subject to fulfilment of

    qualifications and eligibility criteria.
7
15. In sum and substance, both ACP and MACP Schemes are

    schemes devised with the object of ensuring that the

    employees      who   are    unable     to   avail     of    adequate

    promotional opportunities, get some relief in the

    form of financial benefits. Accordingly, the schemes

    provide      for     regular       financial       upgradation    on

    completion of 12-24 years and 10-20-30 years of

    service      without    promotion.          They    are    incentive

    schemes for the employees who complete a particular

    period of service but without getting promotion for

    lack    of   promotional       avenues.     The    effect    of   the

    schemes must be judged keeping in view the object

    and the purport of the scheme.
16.
In
Union of India and Anr. Vs. G.Ranjanna and Ors.
reported in (2008) 14 SCC 721, the three-Judges Bench

    of this Court held that in situ promotions are made

    to remove stagnation of grade C and grade D employees

    by giving them certain monetary benefits.
17. It     was    further      observed     that       fulfilment      of

    educational        qualifications      prescribed         under   the
8
recruitment rules for the purposes of promotion are

    not necessary for non-functional in situ promotion.

    In other words, educational qualification required

    for the purposes of promotion is not necessary for

    the   grant      of   in   situ       promotion,   i.e.,   only   for

    extending the monetary benefit where there are no

    promotional avenues and the employees are likely to

    be stagnated.
18. In the aforesaid case, the employees were working as

    malis (Gardeners) and had claimed promotion in the

    higher     pay    scale.          The    Central     Administrative

    Tribunal      seized       of     the     original    applications

    observed that the employees cannot claim the scale

    of the next higher post by way of in situ promotion.

    On the matter being taken to the High Court by way

    of a writ petition, the contention of the employees

    was accepted and it was observed that the object of

    in situ promotion on non-functional posts, is to

    ensure that the group C and D employees are not

    stagnated in the same cadre/pay scale and that they
9
should be provided with certain monetary benefits.

    Therefore, the rejection of the claim for such non-

    functional in situ promotion on the ground that the

    employees      do   not     possess      the   necessary      minimum

    qualification of matriculation as per the rules is

    not justified and renders the order erroneous in law.

    The view so taken by the Division Bench of the High

    Court    was   affirmed      by       this   Court     in   the   above

    referred Civil Appeals holding that the High Court

    has correctly analysed the object of the in situ

    promotion and fixation of pay scales to Group C and

    D employees to avoid stagnation.
19. In view of the aforesaid legal position coupled with

    the     fact   that    the    qualification            of   graduation

    prescribed     is     for   the       promotion   to    the   post   of

    Accounts Officer rather than for the grant of in situ

    promotion on the non-functional post or for extending

    the benefit of ACP which is purely and simply in the

    nature of grant of monetary benefit without actually

    effectuating any promotion to any higher post, we
10
are of the opinion that the judgment and order of

    the Division Bench of the High Court impugned in the

    appeals cannot be sustained. It is accordingly hereby

    set aside and that the judgment of the writ court

    dated 28.11.2017 is restored. The appellants are

    extended the benefit of ACP, as directed by the writ

    court.
20. We have not considered it necessary to deal with the

    two cases on the basis of which the Single Judge has

    allowed the writ petitions and granted the benefit

    of    the    ACP     to   the        appellants,       as    we      have

    independently of those two decisions have considered

    and   held    that    the   appellants           are     entitled     to

    financial     upgradation        under     the     ACP      Scheme    on

    completion of requisite regular service ignoring the

    higher qualification prescribed for the next higher

    post as grant of such benefit is not actually a

    promotion but only financial upgradation and if the

    higher qualification is insisted it would frustrate

    the purpose of the entire scheme.
11
21. The appeals are allowed in the above terms.     There

    shall be no order as to costs.
………………………………………………J.
                                     [B.R. Gavai]


                                      ………………………………………………J.
                                     [Pankaj Mithal]
New Delhi;
April 25, 2023.