[Cites
7
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S. Sri Mahavir Agency vs The State Of West Bengal on 17 April, 2023
Author:
Rajesh Bindal
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023



                                                       REPORTABLE
                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                            CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                             CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 982 OF 2023
                         (ARISING OUT OF S.L.P.(CRL.) NO.8128/2016)

                M/s SRI MAHAVIR AGENCY
                & ANR.                                            …Appellants

                                            Versus

                THE STATE OF WEST BENGAL
                & ANR.                                          …Respondents


                                      JUDGMENT
Rajesh Bindal, J.
1.          The appellant was accused in a complaint filed

                under Section 16(1)(a)(i) read with
Section 7
of the Prevention

                of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (for short “the Act”). He was

                convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment

                for a period of six months by Senior Municipal Magistrate,

                Calcutta.    In appeal, the conviction and sentence of the

                appellant was upheld by the Additional District & Sessions
Signature Not Verified
Judge, Fast Track Court, Calcutta vide judgment dated
Digitally signed by
Indu Marwah
Date: 2023.04.17
17:45:47 IST
Reason:
26.06.2009 in Criminal Appeal No.106/2007. The order was
Page 1 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
challenged before the High Court at Calcutta by filing a

revision petition bearing C.R.R. No.64/2014 which was

dismissed on 08.06.2016. The judgment has been impugned

before this Court.
2.        Learned counsel for the appellant raised a legal

argument and submitted that the appellant is merely a vendor

who purchased food item pan masala, namely, ‘Pan Parag’

from M/s Kothari Pouches Limited, the manufacturer, in sealed

packaged condition and sold it to its customers. In terms of
Section 14
of the Act, the manufacturer had given warranty

about the nature and quality of the product sold by the

petitioners. It was in the form of a bill having a specific note

with reference to the warranty. The protection is available to

the appellant in terms of
Section 19(2)
of the Act which

provides for defences which may be available in prosecutions

under the Act.       The Courts below failed to consider the

aforesaid legal argument and upheld the conviction.
Page 2 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
3.           On the other hand, learned counsel for the

respondents submitted that it is a case in which samples of pan

masala namely ‘Pan Parag’ were collected from the business

premises of Chanda Aggarwal, buyer of pan masala from the

appellant.     Initially complaint was filed against Chanda

Aggarwal and Binod Agarwal. However, on an application

filed by them, the appellant was impleaded as an accused as

they had produced the bill showing purchase from the

appellant. Only the appellant was convicted in the said matter

as Chanda Aggarwal and Binod Agarwal were given benefit of

protection under
Section 19(2)
of the Act.        The samples of

seized pan masala were tested twice, once by the Public

Analyst for Calcutta Municipal Corporation and then by

Central Food Laboratory at CFTRI, Mysore on the application

of the appellant. Both times the sample did not conform to the

standards laid down for ‘Pan Masala’ under the Act and Rules

framed thereof and the tests failed. Hence, the offence was

clearly established.
4.           It was further submitted that the appellant cannot be
Page 3 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
allowed to go scot-free only on technical grounds. A warranty

has to be given by the manufacturer or distributor in the

prescribed form. In the case in hand, there is no such warranty

produced by the appellant. There are concurrent findings of

fact recorded by all the Courts below. Another argument

raised is that the appellant cannot be said to be a vendor. No

case for interference is made out.
5.
In response to the arguments raised by learned

counsel for the respondents, the learned counsel for the

appellant referred to the Constitution Bench judgment of this

Court in
Mangaldas Raghavji Ruparel and another v. State of

Maharashtra State1
to submit that though the word “Vendor”

has not been defined in the Act, however, it has been defined

to mean a person who has sold the article of food, which is

alleged to be adulterated.
6.                Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused

the relevant referred record.
1
AIR 1966 Supreme Court 128
Page 4 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
7.        To appreciate the arguments raised by the learned

counsel for the parties, reference to provisions of
Sections 14
and
19
of the Act would be relevant. The same reads as

under:-
“14. Manufacturers, distributors and dealers to
          give warranty.—No manufacturer or distributor of,
          or dealer in, any article of food shall sell such article
          to any vendor unless he also gives a warranty in
          writing in the prescribed form about the nature and
          quality of such article to the vendor:
Provided that a bill, cash memorandum or invoice in
          respect of the sale of any article of food given by a
          manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, such
          article to the vendor thereof shall be deemed to be a
          warranty given by such manufacturer, distributor or
          dealer under this section.
Explanation.—In this section, in sub-section (2) of
Section 19
and in Section 20-A, the expression
          “distributor” shall include a commission agent.”

          “ 19. Defences which may or may not be allowed
          in prosecutions under this Act.—(1) It shall be no
          defence in a prosecution for an offence pertaining to
          the sale of any adulterated or misbranded article of
Page 5 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
food to allege merely that the vendor was ignorant of
          the nature, substance or quality of the food sold by
          him or that the purchaser having purchased any
          article for analysis was not prejudiced by the sale.
(2) A vendor shall not be deemed to have committed
          an offence pertaining to the sale of any adulterated or
          misbranded article of food if he proves—
(a) that he purchased the article of food—
(i) in a case where a licence is prescribed for
                 the sale thereof, from a duly licensed
                 manufacturer, distributor, or dealer.
(ii) in any other case, from any manufacturer,
                 distributor, or dealer, with a written warranty
                 in the prescribed form; and
(b) that the article of food while in his possession
             was properly stored and that he sold it in the same
             state as he purchased it.
(3) Any person by whom a warranty as is referred
          to in
Section 14
is alleged to have been given shall be
          entitled to appear at the hearing and give evidence.”
8.        A perusal of
Section 14
of the Act shows that there is

a bar on the manufacturer or distributor or dealer to sell any

article to any vendor unless he has given a warranty in writing
Page 6 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
about the nature and quality of such article to the vendor. Rule

12A of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Rules, 1955 (for

short, “the Rules”) prescribes the procedure to give warranty.

It reads as under:-
“12A.       Warranty.-           Every      manufacturer,
          distributor, or dealer selling an article of food to
          a vendor shall give either separately or in the bill,
          cash memo or a label a warranty in Form VIA.”
9.        Proviso to
Section 14
thereof provides that a bill,

cash memorandum or invoice in respect of the sale of any

article of food given by a manufacturer or distributor of, or

dealer in, such article to the vendor thereof shall be deemed

to be a warranty given by such manufacturer, distributor or

dealer.
10.       Form VIA, as referred to in 12A of the Rules

provides text of the warranty to be furnished by the

manufacturer, distributor or dealer selling the article of food.

The same reads as under:-
Page 7 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
“[FORM VIA
                                  (See rule 12 A)
                               FORM OF WARRANTY

Invoice No. ……………….                                    Place……………
Form ………………………                                         Date…………….
To ………………………….
Date of Sale   Nature and quality   Batch No. or Code No.       Quantity      price
               of Article/Brand
               Name, if any
1                2                      3                      4             5
I/ We hereby certify that food/ foods mentioned in this invoice is/are
warranted to be of the nature and quality which it/ these purports/purport to be.
…………………………
                                                          Signature of Manufacturer,
                                                               Distributor or Dealer
Name and Address of
Manufacturer/ Packer                               Licence No. ………………
(in case of packed article).                       (Wherever applicable.)]”
11.            A conjoint reading of
Section 14
, Rule 12A and Form

VIA provides that no manufacturer or distributor or a dealer of

any food article shall sell such article to any vendor unless he

has given a warranty in writing in the prescribed form

regarding nature and quality of such articles to the vendor.

The procedure to give a warranty has been provided in Rule

12A of the Rules. Proviso to
Section 14
provides that even a

bill, cash memo or invoice in respect of sale of any article
Page 8 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
given by the manufacturer or distributor or dealer shall be

deemed to be a warranty given by such manufacturer,

distributor or dealer.    Form VIA provides the text of the

warranty to be given.
12.        Exhibit C/Annexure P-1, i.e. Invoice No. 1377 dated

12.08.1999 vide which the appellant had purchased the ‘Pan

Masala’ from M/s Kothari Pouches Ltd., is on record.                 It

contains a certification “1. We hereby certify that the goods

mentioned in this invoice are warranted to be of nature and

quality which theses purport to be.” A perusal of the aforesaid

certification given by the manufacturer of the ‘Pan Masala’

shows that it was in terms of the requirement of law.
13.
Section 19(2)
of the Act provides for the defences

which are available to a vendor from prosecution under the

Act. Sub-clause (ii) of
Section 19(2)(a)
of the Act provides that

a vendor shall not be deemed to have committed an offence

pertaining to the sale of any adulterated or misbranded article

of food if he proves that he purchased the article of food from
Page 9 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
any manufacturer, distributor or dealer with a written warranty

in prescribed form. Accordingly, the appellant was having a

valid defence in terms of
Section 19(2)
of the Act as the packed

item sold by him namely ‘Pan Parag’ was having a written

warranty in prescribed form from the manufacturer.
14.       The term ‘Vendor’ as such has not been defined

either in the Act or in the Rules. In Mangaldas Raghavji

Ruparel’s case (supra), the word ‘Vendor’ is defined to mean

a person who has sold the article of food, which is alleged to

be adulterated. The Bench stated:-
“The word “Vendor” though not defined in the Act,
          would obviously mean the person who had sold the
          article of food which is alleged to be adulterated.”
15.       In the case in hand, it is the appellant who sold the

article of food after purchasing the same from the

manufacturer through the invoices which contained the

warranty as prescribed under the Act and the Rules. Hence,

he had the protection available under
Section 19(2)(a)
of the

Act.
Page 10 of 11
Criminal Appeal No.982/2023
16.       Though,
Section 20A
of the Act provides for

impleadment of manufacturer, distributor, or dealer in a

pending complaint, however, nothing was pointed out at the

time of hearing that any such action was taken.
17.       In view of the aforesaid reasons, the appeal is

allowed. Impugned judgment and final order of the High Court

is set aside. Bail bonds of the appellant stand discharged.
….…………..………J.
                                             [Abhay S. Oka]


                                          ….……………..……J.
                                             [Rajesh Bindal]

New Delhi
April 17, 2023
//NR//
Page 11 of 11