[Cites
0
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sachit Kumar Singh vs The State Of Jharkhand on 28 April, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2793-98 OF 2023


                         Sachit Kumar Singh & Ors. Etc. Etc.
                                                           ...Appellant(s)


                                               Versus


                         The State of Jharkhand & Ors. Etc. Etc.
                                                         …Respondent(s)



                                          JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

                               impugned    common    judgment    and   order

                               passed by the Division Bench of the High

                               Court of Jharkhand at Ranchi in respective
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Letters Patent Appeals, by which, the Division
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.04.28
16:27:29 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 18
Bench of the High Court has dismissed the

     said appeals and has not interfered with the

     common judgment and order passed by the

     learned Single Judge dismissing the writ

     petitions,    the   original    writ   petitioners   –

     candidates who applied for the post of Sub

     Inspector of Police have preferred the present

     appeals.
2.   That the respondents – Jharkhand Staff

     Selection Commission (Commission) invited

     applications for appointment to the post of

     Sub   Inspector     of   Police   through      limited

     competitive examination from the eligible

     candidates vide advertisement No. 09/2017.

     That based on the requisition sent by the

     parent       department,       1544    posts     were

     advertised, against which 3350 applications
Page 2 of 18
were received by the Commission. Total 3219

candidates      appeared    in    the    examination

including      the   appellants     herein.     It   was

mandatory for the candidates to obtain a

minimum of 45% of marks in both the papers

(Paper-2 and Paper-3) and a total of 50%

marks    for     qualification    in     the    written

examination. Five percent relaxation was

allowed to the SC/ST candidates in the

minimum          qualification         marks.        The

examination was based on OMR basis. That

out of total 3219 candidates appeared in the

examination only 663 candidates were able to

obtain the minimum qualification marks in

the written examination. Rest including the

original writ petitioners – appellants herein

were found ineligible having failed to obtain

the     minimum        qualifying       marks.       399
Page 3 of 18
candidates      were     declared       successful,

      however, thereafter, on the basis of physical

      and     medical     examination,        only     396

      candidates      were     found      eligible      for

      recommendation and came to be appointed.


2.1   The original writ petitioners who were short of

      one or two marks in getting the minimum

      qualifying marks made representations dated

      01.12.2017, 06.01.2018 and 08.01.2018 and

      raised the objections against key answers.

      According to them, key answers with respect

      to    nine   questions   were     wrong        and/or

      incorrect.   That   thereafter,   the    respective

      original writ petitioners filed the writ petitions

      before the High Court for appropriate reliefs

      or directing to strike down the questions

      which were out of the syllabus and/or of
Page 4 of 18
which the key answers were incorrect. They

      prayed for obtaining the expert’s opinion. The

      writ petitions were opposed, inter-alia, on the

      ground       that   they    have   not   raised       any

      objection     within      the   stipulated     time    as

      informed      by    the    Commission        i.e.,   from

      01.12.2017 to 08.12.2017. It was pointed

      that even accepting that all the answers of

      those questions have wrongly been printed

      but the same is wrong for all in general,

      therefore, no prejudice has been caused to

      the original writ petitioners/appellants. The

      learned Single Judge dismissed the writ

      petitions.
2.2   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

      common judgment and order passed by the

      learned Single Judge dismissing the writ
Page 5 of 18
petitions, the appellants herein preferred the

present letters patent appeals before the

Division Bench of the High Court. By the

impugned common judgment and order, the

Division   Bench   of    the   High   Court    has

dismissed the appeals, mainly, on the ground

that no objections were raised between the

period from 01.12.2017 to 08.12.2017 within

which the candidates were required to submit

their objections, if any, and therefore, their

prayer for obtaining the expert’s opinion

and/or for re-evaluation is not required to be

granted. The Division Bench of the High

Court also observed that even if, there is

some   discrepancy      in   the   answers    such

discrepancy is for all the candidates and

therefore, no prejudice will be said to be

caused to the original writ petitioners. The
Page 6 of 18
Division    Bench   of     the    High   Court    also

      observed that even if the marks would be

      added of such questions in favour of the writ

      petitioners/appellants, the same would also

      be awarded to other candidates and in that

      view of the matter, there will be no change in

      the merit position as existing on the date as

      they were all short of one or two marks from

      the last selected candidate and if one or two

      marks would be awarded to them the same

      would      be    awarded     to    the    successful

      candidates as well, therefore, the fact remains

      the same with respect to the position of the

      appellants in comparison to the successful

      candidates.
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

      impugned        common     judgment      and     order
Page 7 of 18
passed by the High Court dismissing the

     letters     patent    appeals,    the    original   writ

     petitioners       have    preferred      the     present

     appeals.
3.   Shri      Gopal       Sankaranarayanan,          learned

     Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf of

     the appellants – original writ petitioners and

     Shri      Anil   K.   Jha,    learned    counsel    has

     appeared on behalf of the Jharkhand Staff

     Selection        Commission       and    Shri    Jayant

     Mohan, learned counsel has appeared on

     behalf of the State.
4.   Shri      Gopal       Sankaranarayanan,          learned

     Senior Advocate, appearing on behalf of the

     original writ petitioners - appellants has

     submitted         that       as   such     the      first

     representation was made by the original writ
Page 8 of 18
petitioners on 01.12.2017 which was within

      the time limit for submitting the objections. It

      is submitted that therefore, the High Court

      has   materially   erred   in   non-suiting   the

      original writ petitioners on the ground that

      the objections were not raised within the

      stipulated time for raising the objections.


4.1   It is further submitted that even the High

      Court has also materially erred in observing

      that even if the marks would be added of

      such questions, it will be added to all the

      candidates and therefore, no prejudice shall

      be caused to the original writ petitioners. It is

      submitted that in fact, the respective original

      writ petitioners were not found eligible solely

      on the ground that they failed to obtain

      minimum qualifying marks. It is submitted
Page 9 of 18
that as such the respective original writ

      petitioners were short of one or two marks

      only in achieving the minimum qualifying

      marks. It is submitted that therefore, if the

      marks would have been added of such

      questions of which the answers were found

      incorrect, the original writ petitioners would

      be achieving the minimum qualifying marks

      and therefore, their cases would have been

      considered. It is submitted that therefore, the

      High Court has materially erred in observing

      that no prejudice shall be caused to the

      appellants even if the marks would have been

      added of such questions.
4.2   It is further submitted by learned Senior

      Advocate   appearing    on    behalf   of   the

      appellants that out of 1544 posts advertised
Page 10 of 18
only 396 appointments were made and the

      remaining posts had remained vacant.
5.    While opposing the present appeals, learned

      counsel      appearing       on   behalf        of    the

      Commission      as    well   as   the    State       have

      vehemently submitted that as original writ

      petitioners failed to achieve the minimum

      qualifying marks and therefore, they were

      found to be ineligible. It is submitted that as

      such the original writ petitioners submitted

      the objections after the prescribed period to

      raise the objections and therefore, the High

      Court has rightly non-suited the original writ

      petitioners.
5.1   It   is   further    submitted    that     as    rightly

      observed by the High Court that even if there

      was some discrepancy in the answers with
Page 11 of 18
respect to certain questions, the same was

      with   respect   to   all   the   candidates   and

      therefore, even if, the marks are added with

      respect to such questions, no prejudice shall

      be caused to the original writ petitioners as

      similar marks will have to be added in case of

      other selected candidates.
5.2   Making the above submissions, it is prayed to

      dismiss the present appeals.
6.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that

      the original writ petitioners applied for the

      post of Sub Inspector of Police. Their cases

      were not considered for further appointment

      as they were found ineligible, having failed to

      achieve the minimum qualifying marks. They

      submitted their objections with respect to

      nine questions and according to the original
Page 12 of 18
writ petitioners, answers with respect to nine

questions were incorrect. The Division Bench

of the High Court has refused to consider the

objections on merits, mainly, on the ground

that   objections   were        raised   beyond   the

prescribed     period      of      submitting     the

objections. The High Court has noted that the

objections were filed on 06.01.2018 and

08.01.2018. However, it is the case on behalf

of the original writ petitioners that the first

objection was submitted on 01.12.2017 the

copy of which is placed on record (page 235 of

SLP paper books). Therefore, the High Court

ought to have considered the objections on

merits   and    ought      to     have    considered

obtaining the expert’s opinion. The High

Court has as such taken too technical view

and has erred in refusing to consider the
Page 13 of 18
objections on merits. At this stage, it is

     required to be noted that even if, the

     objections were raised on 06.01.2018 and

     08.01.2018, the same were prior to the date

     of   the   declaration   of   result   i.e.,   on

     09.01.2018. Therefore, the High Court ought

     to have considered the objections on merits

     and/or called for the expert’s opinion on nine

     questions of which as per the original writ

     petitioners, answers were incorrect. If the

     expert’s opinion would have been taken on

     the correct answers and/or on the answers

     with respect to such nine questions for which

     the objections were raised, the truth would

     have come out.
7.   Even, the High Court has materially erred in

     observing that no prejudice shall be caused to
Page 14 of 18
the original writ petitioners even if the marks

     would have been added with respect to such

     questions as the marks would be added in

     case of other successful candidates also.

     However, it is required to be noted that as the

     original writ petitioners failed to achieve the

     minimum qualifying marks by one or two

     marks only, therefore, if some marks would

     have been added they would be achieving the

     minimum qualifying marks and therefore,

     they would have been eligible and their cases

     would   have    been   considered   on   merits.

     Therefore, the High Court is not right in

     observing that no prejudice shall be caused to

     the original writ petitioners.
8.   As the High Court has refused to consider the

     objections on merits on the ground that the
Page 15 of 18
objections   were   not   raised   within   the

     stipulated period prescribed for submitting

     the objections and thereby, has refused to get

     the expert’s opinion, the matter is to be

     remanded to the Division Bench of the High

     Court for fresh consideration of the appeals

     on merits with the observation that it will be

     open for the Division Bench to call for the

     expert’s opinion on the questions of which

     their answers were alleged to be incorrect for

     which the objections were raised so that if

     ultimately it is found that the answers with

     respect to some questions were incorrect and

     consequently, the marks are added and they

     may become eligible.
9.   In view of the above and for the reasons

     stated above, present appeals are allowed in
Page 16 of 18
part. The impugned common judgment and

order passed by the High Court dismissing

the Letters Patent Appeals is hereby quashed

and set aside. Matters are remitted back to

the Division Bench of the High Court for fresh

decision   of      Letters     Patent   Appeals   in

accordance with law and on its own merits

and   in   light    of   the    observations   made

hereinabove. The Letters Patent Appeals on

remand be decided and disposed of at the

earliest preferably within a period of three

months from the date of the present order. As

observed hereinabove, it will be open for the

Division Bench of the High Court to call for

the expert’s opinion with respect to the

questions of which the answers were alleged

to be incorrect for which the objections were

raised. However, the same is left to the High
Page 17 of 18
Court.   Present    appeals   are   accordingly

     allowed in terms of the present order. No

     costs.
………………………………….J.
                                [M.R. SHAH]




NEW DELHI;              ………………………………….J.
APRIL 28, 2023               [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
Page 18 of 18