[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Rockline Construction Company vs Doha Bank Qsc on 24 April, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Krishna Murari
1

                                                                        Non­Reportable
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         MISCELLANEOUS APPLICATION NO.460 OF 2023
                                                  IN
                          SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C)NO.16537 OF 2021




          ROCKLINE CONSTRUCTION COMPANY                                               …APPELLANT


                                               VERSUS


          DOHA BANK QSC & ORS.                                                      ..RESPONDENTS




                                          JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL J.
1. The           present   Miscellaneous       Application   is   filed    seeking
Signature Not Verified
clarification of the order dated 12.05.2022 passed by this
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.04.24
18:01:55 IST
Reason:
Court in Special Leave Petition No.16537/2021 titled
Rockline

                      Construction Company v. Doha Bank QSC & Ors.
, whereby a
2
Judgement and Order of the High Court of Bombay upholding

  the setting aside sale of a property by the Debt Recovery

  Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai was not interfered with. The

  applicant has prayed for the following relief:
“a. Clarify the Order dated 12.05.2022 passed by
        this Hon’ble Court to the extent of fixing the rate of
        interest at which the amount deposited by the
        applicant in 2007 is to be refunded, and also
        mesne profit, if any to be deducted from the said
        amount to be refunded to the applicant.”
2. The auction sale confirmed in favour of the applicant M/s.

  Rockline Construction Company on 16 th May 2007 was set

  aside with the applicant entitled to a refund of the entire sale

  amount along with the accrued interest, if any, after deducting

  the mesne profits and/or losses. There has been long­standing

  litigation inter se the parties regarding this transaction. At this

  juncture, it is observed that the present case has a chequered

  history, but for brevity, only relevant orders are being referred

  to.
3. The order dated 07.07.2014 passed by the Debt Recovery

  Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, in Miscellaneous Appeal bearing

  No. 303/2010 titled as “Oman International Bank S.A.O.G. v.
3
M/s Rockline Construction Co. & Anr.”, holding the applicant

  entitled to a refund of the amount, is extracted as under:
“(1) The appeal is allowed with no orders as to
        costs. The order of the DRT is set aside and order
        of the Recovery Officer has been restored so far the
        Original Application is concerned.
(2) The Recovery Officer is directed to return Rs.1
        Crore deposited by 2nd Respondent Mahendra
        Kumar Kawad with accrued interest within 7 days
        from the copy or receipt of the order.
(3) The Original Applicant/1st respondent is also
        entitled to withdraw the entire sale amount with
        accrued interest, if any, (after deducting mesne
        profits or loss) for his wrongful purpose on
        surrendering the entire possession of the property
        to the Bank.
(4) The mesne profits can be ascertained by
        appointing the Advocate/Counsel before the DRT
        on the application filed by the respective parties.
(5) The Bank is directed to take appropriate steps
        to recover the amount as per the procedure known
        to law.”
                                       (Emphasis supplied)
4. It is not in dispute that the said order attained finality with the

  passing of the order dated 12.05.2022 by this Court in a

  Special Leave Petition filed by
Rockline Construction Company
(supra). It is a matter of record that much prior thereto, the
4
applicant had already moved an application seeking a refund

of the amount in terms of the order dated 07.07.2014 passed

by the Debt Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, in which

vide order dated 13.07.2021, the subject matter of the present

application, passed by the Recovery Officer­I, Mumbai Debt

Recovery Tribunal No.1, the applicant was held entitled to

simple interest @ 9% per annum. This is against the

applicant's claim for interest on such rate and terms as

normally govern business transactions.   The relevant portion

of the order reads as under:
“7. Observations :
7.1
     From the records it is observed that CH Bank has
     taken/charged interest @15% in the said loan
     account. It appears that similarly bank earns
     interest on the money by lending and it may have
     also used that money Rs.9.56 crore in further
     lending that would have been fetched interest over
     and above 6 percent ranging between 9% to 15% or
     above. Hence, it would be in the interest of the
     equity and justice to allow 9% simple interest on
     the sale consideration given/deposit made by the
     erstwhile auction purchaser.
7.2
     From 2007 the Amount Rs.9.56 core @ 9% for 14
     years would become 216056000.00 (Twenty­One
     Crores Sixty Lacs Fifty Six Thousand only).
7.3
5
In    view   of    the    above    Rs.58580859.00
(Rs.216056000.00 – Rs.157475141.00) (Rupees
        Five Crore Eighty Five Lacs Eighty Thousand Eight
        Hundred Fifty Nine only) is quantified as amount of
        which erstwhile auction purchaser/ M/s. Rockline
        Constructions is entitled to withdraw on
        surrendering the entire possession of the property
        to the Bank.
xxxxx                xxxxx               xxxxx
        xxxx
        1. xxx
        2. xxx
3. Erstwhile auction purchaser M/s Rockline is
           entitled for Rs.58580859.00 (Rupees Five Crore
           Eighty Five Lacs Eighty Thousand Eight
           Hundred Fifty Nine only) after deducting the
           mesne profit/loss as per order of the Hon’ble
           DRAT and Hon’ble Bombay High Court.”

                                               (Emphasis supplied)
5. It is also borne from the record that assailing the same, the

  appellant preferred an appeal that is clear from the bare

  reading of the instant application.
6. In   support   of   its   claim,      the    applicant   has   placed

  contemporaneous material indicating the market practice at

  which the rate of interest is charged about commercial

  transactions; it is @14.5% with monthly rests, subject to

  change from time to time.
7. There is no dispute that the applicant deposited huge amounts


  as part of the auction bid in the year 2007.
6
8. In the backdrop above, it cannot be disputed that the

  applicant is entitled to interest. The only two contentious

  issues that survive, requiring adjudication, are (i) the rate and

  terms of interest to which the applicant would be entitled and
(ii) the determination of mesne profits. In normal course, we

  would have ourselves decided the same; however, considering

  the fact that the appeal in relation to it is pending before the

  adjudicatory authority, being Appeal No.8 of 2022, Debt

  Recovery Appellate Tribunal, Mumbai, we refrain from doing

  so,   enabling   the   said   fact­finding   authority    to   do   so,

  expeditiously and in accordance with the law.
9. Before us, it is argued that the appeal is perhaps barred with

  the efflux of time. We find this objection, in the attending facts

  and circumstances, to be untenable given the long­standing

  pending litigation inter se the parties to the lis.      As such, the

  plea of limitation cannot be allowed to stand in the way of the

  determination of the applicant's right and entitlement of

  monetary claims on merits.
10.   Hence, having considered the arguments put forth in the

  application as also the written submissions filed on behalf of
7
the respondent, we dispose of the instant application in the

  following terms:
A)   The parties shall appear before the appellate authority

      on 1st May 2023 and place on record a copy of the order;
B)   The   appellate   authority    shall     decide      the    appeal

      preferred by the applicant strictly on merits, in accordance

      with the law, expeditiously and because each day’s delay

      would only entail loss by way of the addition of amount

      payable as interest, shall decide the same within a period

      of two months. All parties shall fully cooperate. The issue

      of limitation shall be deemed to have been closed.
C)   Liberty reserved to the applicant to approach this

      Court should the need so arise specifically.
11. The miscellaneous application stands disposed of.
..........................................J.
                                                    (KRISHNA MURARI)




                                     .........................................J.
                                                       (SANJAY KAROL)
8
Dated : 24th April, 2023;
Place : New Delhi.