[Cites
14
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Maharashtra State Electricity ... vs Adani Power Maharashtra Limited on 20 April, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
Vikram Nath
,
Sanjay Karol
REPORTABLE
                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                     CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                   CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 687-688 OF 2021

                         MAHARASHTRA STATE ELECTRICITY
                         DISTRIBUTION COMPANY LIMITED               ...APPELLANT(S)
                                                   VERSUS
                         ADANI POWER MAHARASHTRA
                         LIMITED AND OTHERS                       ...RESPONDENT(S)




                                                JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   The present appeals challenge the judgment and order

                         dated 5th October 2020 passed by the Appellate Tribunal for

                         Electricity (hereinafter referred to as ‘APTEL’), in cross

                         appeals being Appeal No. 340 of 2019, filed by Maharashtra

                         State Electricity Distribution Company Limited (hereinafter

                         referred to as ‘MSEDCL’), the appellant herein, and Appeal

                         No. 354 of 2019, filed by Adani Power Maharashtra Limited
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
(hereinafter referred to as ‘APML’), respondent No. 1 herein,
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.04.20
11:59:44 IST
Reason:
thereby challenging the order dated 6 th September 2019,
1
passed by Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory Commission

(hereinafter referred to as ‘MERC’).
2.   APML and MSEDCL had entered into four long term

Power Project Agreements (hereinafter referred to as ‘PPA’)

dated (a) 8th September, 2008 for 1230 MW (hereinafter

referred to as ‘1230 MW PPA’); (b) 21 st March, 2010 for 1200

MW (hereinafter referred to as ‘1200 MW PPA’); (c) 9 th August,

2010 for 120 MW (hereinafter referred to as ‘120 MW PPA’)

and (d)16th February, 2013 for 440 MW (hereinafter referred

to as ‘440 MW PPA’), pursuant to the competitive bidding

process conducted by MSEDCL.
3.   Prior to the signing of the PPAs between the parties,

APML had applied to the Ministry of Coal, Government of

India (for short, “MoC”) for allotment of Lohara Coal Blocks

on 10th January 2007. Thereafter, on 6th November 2007, the

MoC issued a Letter of Allocation (LoA) to APML conveying

the allocation of Lohara (West) and Lohara Extension (E) Coal

Blocks as the allocated source of fuel. Subsequently, on 23 rd

November 2007, APML applied to the Standing Linkage

Committee (Long-Term) (hereinafter referred to as “SLC (LT)”)
2
for grant of coal linkage for balance capacity to cover the coal

requirement of Units 1, 2 and 3 of the Tiroda Thermal Power

Station (TPS).
4.   On    27th   December     2007,    the   Government      of

Maharashtra issued a statutory Notification under
Section 38

(V)
of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, classifying 625.82

sq. km. of the Tadoba National Park and Andheri Wildlife

Sanctuary as a Critical Tiger Habitat (CTH). It is pertinent to

note that, at this point in time, the area demarcating the

CTH, did not include the area of Lohara Coal Blocks and as

such, there were no restrictions on coal mining in the

allotted mining lease area.   As per the revised Request for

Proposal (RFP), the bid deadline was 21 st February 2008 and

the cut-off date was 14th February 2008, being seven days

before the deadline.   APML submitted its bid for supply of

1320 MW Power to MSEDCL, wherein it specified that the

fuel source for a portion of the contracted capacity, viz. 800

MW capacity out of 1320 MW, would be the Lohara Coal

Blocks.   A copy of the MoC’s allocation letter dated 6 th
3
November 2007 was appended to the bid, as per the bid

requirements.
5.   Thereafter, on 21st February 2008, i.e., seven days after

the bid cut-off date, the Conservator of the Tadoba Andheri

Tiger Reserve (for short, “TATR”) approved the constitution of

an Expert Committee for the creation of a Buffer Zone

surrounding the core area of TATR under Section 38(V) of the

Wildlife (Protection) Act.
6.   Twenty-four days after the bid cut-off date, the

Conservator, TATR submitted a proposal to the Chief

Conservator of Forest, Maharashtra for creation of the

aforesaid Buffer Zone. During the pendency of this proposal,

the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change,

Government of India (for short, “MoEF”), in exercise of its

powers in terms of
Regulation 7
of MoEF’s Notification dated

14th September 2006, granted the Terms of Reference (ToR),

to APML for mining in the Lohara Coal Blocks, on the basis

of the recommendation made by the Expert Appraisal

Committee, MoEF (for short, “EAC”) in its 21st Meeting.
4
7.   Thereafter, the 1320 MW PPA was executed between the

parties on 8th September 2008, for supply of the contracted

capacity from Units 2 and 3 of the Tiroda TPS. In pursuance

of APML’s application for coal linkage, the SLC(LT) issued a

Letter of Assurance (LoA) dated 12th November 2008,

authorising the coal linkage sought, whilst at the same time,

acknowledging that the Lohara Coal Blocks catered to the

requirement for generation of a portion of APML’s contracted

capacity, i.e. 800 MW to MSEDCL.
8.   In the meanwhile, on 8th October 2008, the Conservator,

TATR submitted a revised proposal for creating the aforesaid

Buffer Zone, which, for the first time, included the mining

lease area of about 176 hectares of the Lohara Coal Blocks.

These proposals were discussed in a meeting of the EAC,

where an area of 1067.21 sq. km. was proposed to be the

Buffer Zone of TATR. Thereafter, in its 59 th Meeting held on

24-25 November 2009, the EAC decided to withdraw the ToR

issued to the Lohara Coal Blocks since the proposed mining

lease areas were falling in the proposed Buffer Zone, which

included a tiger corridor in the midst of a rich forest.
5
Thereafter,   vide notification       dated   5 th   May   2010, the

Government of Maharashtra notified 1101.7 sq. km. as the

Buffer Zone of TATR.
9.     Since the Lohara Coal Blocks could not be utilized to

meet the requirements under the 1320 MW PPA, APML first

informed MSEDCL of its inability to supply power, vide letter

dated 22nd May 2010 and, thereafter, issued a termination

notice to MSEDCL dated 16th February 2011 due to the

occurrence of force majeure, on account of cancellation of

Lohara Coal Blocks, in terms of
Article 12
of the 1320 MW

PPA.
10. On 22nd May 2010, APML informed MSEDCL regarding

its inability to supply power under the PPA from Units II and

III at the PPA-agreed tariff due to cancellation of Lohara Coal

Blocks. On 14th June 2010, APML also informed MSEDCL

regarding the occurrence of a force majeure event in terms of
Article 12
of the PPA.    Consequently, a termination notice

dated 16th February 2011was issued to MSEDCL.
11. On 17th July 2012, APML filed a petition, being Case No.

68 of 2012 before MERC, claiming ‘Change in Law’ and ‘force
6
majeure’ reliefs on account of cancellation of Lohara Coal

Blocks. On 21st August 2013, MERC passed an order in the

said petition directing for a meeting of the Expert Committee

to be constituted to evaluate the impact of withdrawal of the

ToR on Units II and III of Tiroda TPS and determine a

compensatory charge to be paid to APML.             MERC also

worked out an interim relief at Rs.3.124 per KWH, which

would be applicable only for sale of power above the initial

520 MW from the date of commercial operation.         However,

the claim of APML’s with regard to force majeure was rejected

by the said order.
12. Being aggrieved by the said order dated 21 st August

2013,    M/s    Prayas      Energy   Group,   the    consumer

representative (hereinafter referred to as “Prayas”) filed an

appeal being Appeal No. 296 of 2013 challenging the order

passed by MERC. A cross-appeal also came to be filed by

APML being Appeal No. 241 of 2016 challenging the rejection

of plea of force majeure.
13. In pursuance of the order passed by MERC dated 21 st

August 2013, the Government of Maharashtra constituted a
7
High-Level Expert Committee on 9th December 2013.          The

said High-Level Expert Committee filed its report on 17 th

February 2014 recommending grant of compensatory tariff to

APML for 800 MW capacity which was entirely dependent on

coal from Lohara Coal Blocks.
14. On 17th February 2014, MoC cancelled and deallocated

Lohara Coal Blocks on the ground that Environmental

Clearance (EC) and Forest Clearance (FC) were not given to

the said coal blocks. Vide order dated 5 th May 2014, MERC,

in Suo Motu Case No. 63 of 2014, devised a mechanism for

calculating the compensatory fuel charges payable to APML

by MSEDCL. The said order was challenged by MSEDCL and

Prayas in Appeal No. 166 of 2014 and Appeal No. 218 of

2014 respectively.
15. On 25th August 2014, this Court, in its judgment in the

case of
Manohar Lal Sharma v. The Principal Secretary

and Others1
,     held the allocation of coal blocks made by the

Screening Committee from 14th July 1993 onwards to be

illegal.   On 16th April 2015, Ministry of Power (for short,

“MoP”) issued a policy direction under Section 107 of the
1      (2014) 9 SCC 516
8
Electricity Act, 2003
to treat allocation of coal block under

Coal Mine (Special Provisions) Ordinance, 2014 as a ‘Change

in Law’ event. On 28th January 2016, the MoP notified the

revised Tariff Policy.
16. On 11th May 2016, APTEL partly allowed Appeal No. 296

of 2013 filed by Prayas setting aside the order of MERC dated

21st August 2013, except on the issue of ToR cancellation not

being a force majeure event. Vide the said order dated 11th

May 2016, APTEL also allowed the appeals filed by MSEDCL

and Prayas against the MERC’s order dated 5th May 2014.

APTEL held that MERC cannot exercise regulatory powers,

thereby setting aside the award of compensatory fuel charge

to APML by MERC in exercise of its regulatory power.

APTEL, however, kept the force majeure issue open for the

decision on the issue of withdrawal of ToR.
17.
In the meantime, on 11th April 2017, this Court

delivered a judgment in the case of
Energy Watchdog v.

Central Electricity Regulatory Commission and Others2
,

wherein the Court held that change in policies of the

Government affecting availability of domestic coal to the
2     (2017) 14 SCC 80
9
generating companies qualifies as a ‘Change in Law’ event as

defined in the PPAs.
Consequently, vide order dated 31 st May

2019, APTEL allowed the appeal filed by APML being Appeal

No. 241 of 2016 and set aside the order of the MERC dated

21st August 2013 and remanded the matter to MERC for

fresh consideration in the light of judgment of this Court in

the case of
Energy Watchdog
(supra).
18. Being aggrieved thereby, MSEDCL preferred an appeal,

being Appeal No. 340 of 2019, on the ground that MERC

erred in declaring the event of deallocation of Lohara Coal

Blocks as ‘Change in Law’ event under the PPA.         APML

preferred a cross-appeal, being Appeal No. 354 of 2019, on

the ground that, while granting relief on account of ‘Change

in Law’, MERC had adopted an erroneous methodology which

does not restore it to the same economic position as if no

‘Change in Law’ had occurred.
19. The    APTEL     framed     the   following   issues   for

consideration:
(1) “Whether MERC was justified in declaring the
          event of de-allocation of the Lohara Coal
          Blocks as a change in law event?
10
(2) Whether MERC was justified in considering
           the landed cost of linkage coal as the basis for
           computing change in law compensation to
           Adani when Lohara Coal Blocks were the bid-
           identified source of coal?
(3)   Whether MERC was justified in pegging the
           carrying cost to the rate specified in prevalent
           Multi Year Tariff ("MYT") Regulations?
     (4)   Whether MERC was justified in restricting the
           change in law relief to the difference between
           100% assurance in New Coal Distribution
           Policy ("NCDP"), 2007 and 75% assurance
           under the SHAKTI Policy based on the Fuel
           Supply Agreement ("FSA") dated 29.03.2018
           being signed under the SHAKTI Policy?
     (5)   Whether MERC was justified in linking NCDP
           2007 with allotment of the Lohara Coal
           Blocks?
(6)   Whether deallocation of the Lohara Coal
           Blocks was a foreseeable risk for Adani and
           whether the same has any implication on
           change in law relief allowed to Adani?
(7)   Whether      MERC      adopted    the    correct
           methodology regarding Station Heat Rate
           ("SHR") and Gross Calorific Value ("GCV') in
           the Impugned Order while computing the
           change in law relief allowed to Adani? Whether
           such methodology adheres to the principle of
           restitution?”
20. The APTEL, vide the impugned judgment and order

dated 5th October 2020, answered the issues as under:
“14.1   Issue No.1:- We hold that the Appellant was
             affected by change in law on account of the
             de-allocation of Lohara Coal Blocks.
11
Accordingly, the impugned order is
       upheld on this issue.
14.2   Issue No.2:- We hold that the Appellant is
       entitled to be paid Lohara Coal cost
       including transportation cost as base while
       computing the compensations for the
       change in law events. The issue is decided
       in favour of the Appellant.
14.3   Issue No.3:- As the Appellant itself had
       sought the carrying cost at the rate
       prescribed in the MYT Tariff Regulations in
       its petition before the State Commission, we
       see no reason to interfere with the
       impugned order on this issue. Hence, the
       Appellant cannot raise its claim contrary to
       what has been sought before the State
       Commission. The issue is decided against
       the Appellant.
14.4   Issue No.4:- ln line with our judgment
       dated 28.9.2020 in A.No.116 of 2019 &
       batch, we hold that findings in the
       impugned order relating to the issue of
       restricting the quantum of shortfall in
       domestic coal to a maximum of 25% are
       against the principles of restitution under
       the change in law provisions of the PPA.
The issue is decided in favour of the
       Appellant.
14.5   Issue No.5:- Since this issue was not
       pressed during the proceedings, we do not
       find it necessary to return a finding on this
       issue. No decision required.
14.6   Issue No.6:- We hold that the Appellant’s
       rights and obligation in the PPA cannot be
       thwarted based on omissions on part of
       Government instrumentalities and hence,
       the de-allocation of the Lohara Coal Blocks
       was not a feaseable risk for the Appellant.
       The issue is decided in favour of the
       Appellant.
12
14.7   Issue No.7:- In line with our judgment
            dated 28.9.2020 in A.No.116 of 2019 &
            batch, we hold that the change in law
            compensation shall be calculated based on
            the SHR specified in the MERC MYT
            Regulations, 2011 or the actual SHR
            whichever is lower and actual GCV of coal
            as received at the plant site. The issue is
            decided in favour of the Appellant.”
21. Consequently, the APTEL allowed the appeal filed by

APML, while rejecting the appeal preferred by MSEDCL.

Aggrieved thereby, MSEDCL has preferred the present

appeals.
22. We have heard Shri M.G. Ramchandran, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant-MSEDCL and

Shri Sajjan Poovayya, learned Senior Counsel appearing on

behalf of respondent No. 1–APML.
23. Shri Ramchandran submitted that both the MERC and

APTEL have grossly erred in holding the deallocation of

Lohara Coal Blocks to be a ‘Change in Law’ event.     It is

submitted that deallocation of coal blocks is a matter

between APML and Coal India Limited (for short, “CIL”) and

the MSEDCL has nothing to do with the same. It is further

submitted that any change to clearances/consents cannot be
13
regarded as ‘Change in Law’.         It is submitted that Clause

4.1.1 of the PPA devolves an obligation and responsibility on

APML to obtain and maintain all consents required under the

PPA and, as such, mere deallocation of Lohara Coal Blocks

could not be treated as ‘Change in Law’.           It is further

submitted that in Case-1 bidding, the arrangement of fuel

was the responsibility of the bidder and, as such, APTEL is

not concerned as to from what sources APML would obtain

the coal. It is further submitted that as per the PPA, it was

APML’s sole responsibility to transport the coal and, as such,

APTEL erred in granting compensation by factoring the

additional cost of transportation.
24. As against this, Shri Poovayya submitted that, as

consistently held by this Court in the cases of
Energy

Watchdog
(supra),
Adani Rajasthan and Maharashtra

State Electricity Distribution Company Limited v. Adani

Power Maharashtra Limited and Others3 [“MSEDCL
v.

APML and Others”, for short], since the deallocation of

Lohara Coal Blocks was on account of inclusion of the said

area into Buffer Zone of TATR vide notification of Government
3    2023 SCC OnLine SC 233
14
of Maharashtra dated 5th May 2010, which was much after

the cut-off date, both MERC and APTEL have correctly held

that the said event would amount to ‘Change in Law’. It is

submitted that the bid of the appellant was submitted on the

basis that Lohara Coal Blocks was allotted to it. However,

much after the cut-off date, on account of the notification

issued by the State of Maharashtra, the coal block was

deallocated and, as such, APML was required to obtain the

coal from other sources which incurred additional costs.
25. Shri Poovayya further submitted that in view of the

judgment of this Court in the case of
Tata Power Company

Limited    Transmission        v.    Maharashtra   Electricity

Regulatory Commission4
and
MSEDCL v. APML and

Others
(supra), an interference in the concurrent findings of

fact would not be warranted.
26. It is further submitted by Shri Poovayya that the Bank

Guarantee furnished by APML was also returned by CIL,

finding no fault on the part of APML thereby fortifying its

claim for Change in Law benefit.
4    2022 SCC OnLine SC 1615
15
27. It is further submitted by Shri Poovayya that MSEDCL

was a part of the Expert Committee, which was constituted

by the MERC vide its order dated 21 st August 2013. Having

participated in the said meeting in which the Expert

Committee held that APML was entitled for compensation on

account of deallocation of Lohara Coal Blocks, it does not lie

in the mouth of MSEDCL to contend that APML is not

entitled to ‘Change in Law’ compensation.
28. Out of the seven issues framed by APTEL, the 5 th issue

was not pressed before the APTEL.
29. When we heard this batch of Electricity appeals, it was

agreed between all the parties that this Court should first

decide Civil Appeal No. 684 of 2021 (
MSEDCL v. APML and

Others
(supra))   and   Civil    Appeal   No.    6927   of   2021

(
Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company

Limited    v.   GMR   Warora        Energy   Ltd.    and    Others
)

inasmuch as three of the issues involved in all the appeals in

the batch were common.        It was submitted that those two

appeals could be decided by deciding the three common

issues. However, insofar as the other appeals are concerned,
16
it was submitted that, in addition to the three common

issues, certain additional issues were also involved and it was

agreed that after those two appeals are decided, the other

appeals should be heard for considering these additional

issues.
30. The said three common issues are thus:
(i)     Whether ‘Change in Law’ relief on account of NCDP

             2013 should be on ‘actuals’ viz. as against 100% of

             normative coal requirement assured in terms of

             NCDP 2007 OR restricted to trigger levels in NCDP

             2013 viz. 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of Assured Coal

             Quantity (ACQ)?
(ii)    Whether for computing ‘Change in Law’ relief, the

             operating parameters be considered on ‘actuals’

             OR as per technical information submitted in bid?
(iii)   Whether ‘Change in Law’ relief compensation is to

             be granted from 1st April 2013 (start of Financial

             Year) or 31st July 2013 (date of NCDP 2013)?
17
31. After extensively hearing all the learned counsel for the

parties, vide the judgment and order dated 3 rd March 2023 in

the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), this Court

decided those two appeals after considering the aforesaid

three issues.
32. The first issue was answered by this Court, holding that

the ‘Change in Law’ relief for domestic coal shortfall should

be on ‘actuals’ i.e. as against 100% of normative coal

requirement assured in terms of NCDP, 2007. Insofar as the

second issue is concerned, it was held that the Station Heat

Rate (“SHR” for short) and Auxiliary consumption should be

considered as per the Regulations or actuals, whichever is

lower. The third issue was answered holding that the Start

date for the ‘Change in Law’ event for the NCDP, 2013 is 1 st

April 2013.
33. As such, Issue No. 4 with regard to compensation for

shortfall of domestic coal on account of ‘Change in Law’ on

account of amendment to the SHAKTI Policy stands covered

by our judgment dated 3rd March 2023 in the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra).
18
34. Insofar as the issue with regard to SHAKTI Policy is

concerned, the same is considered by us in our judgments of

even date, in Civil Appeal Nos. 677-678 of 2021 and Civil

Appeal   No.   5684   of   2021,   holding   therein   that   the

restitutionary principle, as has been applied by this Court on

account of ‘Change in Law’, will also be applicable on

account of change occurring due to introduction of SHAKTI

Policy. As such, no interference would be warranted with the

findings of APTEL on Issue No. 4 in light of the view taken by

us in the aforesaid three judgments.
35. Insofar as Issue No. 3 is concerned, a perusal of the

impugned judgment and order would reveal that MSEDCL

itself had sought the carrying cost prescribed in the MYT

Tariff Regulations before the State Commission.               We,

therefore, find that APTEL has rightly held that MSEDCL

could not be permitted to raise its claim contrary to what was

sought before the State Commission. As such, interference

would not be warranted with the said issue also.
36.
Insofar as Issue No. 7 is concerned, in the judgment of

this Court in the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
19
(supra),    we   have   already   held   that   ‘Change   in   Law’

compensation shall be calculated based on the SHR specified

in the MERC MYT Regulations or the actual SHR whichever

is lower.
37. This Court, in the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), after considering the relevant provisions under the
Electricity Act, 2003
with regard to constitution of various

expert bodies like the CEA, CERC and the learned APTEL,

has held that these bodies are bodies consisting of experts in

the field. After considering various judgments on the issue,

this Court observed thus:
“123. Recently, the Constitution Bench of this
     Court     in   the    case   of
Vivek    Narayan
     Sharma v. Union of India
has held that the
     Courts should be slow in interfering with the
     decisions taken by the experts in the field and
     unless it is found that the expert bodies have
     failed to take into consideration the mandatory
     statutory provisions or the decisions taken are
     based on extraneous considerations or they
     are ex facie arbitrary and illegal, it will not be
     appropriate for this Court to substitute its
     views with that of the expert bodies.”
38.
In the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), we

have upheld the view taken by CERC as well as APTEL,
20
holding that the actual GCV of coal ‘as received’ at the plant

site has to be taken into consideration.         As such, no

interference would be warranted with regard to the said issue

also.
39. The other three issues, in our view, are interlinked. We

find that the only issue that is required to be considered is as

to whether deallocation of Lohara Coal Blocks would amount

to ‘Change in Law’ and as to whether APML would be entitled

to restitution on account of the same.
40. Insofar as the said issue is concerned, the same is

concurrently held in favour of APML by both the MERC and

the APTEL, thereby declaring the event of deallocation of

Lohara Coal Blocks as ‘Change in Law’.        Unless the said

issue is found to be perverse or in ignorance of the

mandatory statutory provisions or is based on extraneous

considerations, it will not be permissible for this Court to

interfere with the same.
41. We will, therefore, have to examine the concurrent

findings of MERC as well as APTEL, guided by these factors.
21
42. It will be relevant to refer to the definition of ‘Law’ as

found in
Article 1.1
of the PPA, which reads thus:
""Law” - means, in relation to this Agreement,
     all laws including Electricity Law in force in
     India and any statute, ordinance, regulation,
     Notification or code, rule. or any interpretation
     of any of them by an Indian Governmental
     Instrumentality and having force of law and
     shall further include all applicable rules.
     regulations. orders. Notifications by an
     Indian      Governmental        Instrumentality
     pursuant to or under any of them and shall
     include all rules. regulations. decisions and
     orders of the CERC and the MERC.
“Indian Governmental Instrumentality" means
     the GOI, Government of Maharashtra and any
     ministry or, department of or, board, agency or
     other regulatory or quasi-judicial authority
     controlled by GOI or Government of States
     where the Procurer and Project are located and
     includes the CERC and MERC."
[Emphasis supplied]
43. A perusal of the said definition would reveal that any

order or notification, rule or regulation by an Indian

Governmental Instrumentality would constitute ‘Law’.          It

cannot be disputed that Government of Maharashtra,

Government of India and various statutory authorities would

fall under the term ‘Governmental Instrumentalities’.
44. It cannot be disputed that in the present case, the cut-

off date under the PPA was 14th August 2008.         It is to be
22
noted that the power to notify a Tiger Reserve as a Buffer

Zone is vested with the State Government under Section 38V

of the Wildlife (Protection) Act.       For consideration and

creation of Buffer Zone, three statutory requirements have to

be complied with, which are thus:
(i)     “an   Expert    Committee      must    be
              constituted     for    identifying    and
              establishing a Buffer Zone;
      (ii)    Gram Sabha should be consulted
              before any such notification and
(iii)   the identification and establishment of
              a Buffer Zone shall be based on
              scientific and objective criteria.”
45. From the material placed on record, it is clear that prior

to 14th August 2008, the area where Lohara Coal Block is

situated was not even proposed to be notified as a Buffer

Zone. It is only seven days after the cut-off date, i.e., 21 st

February 2008, that the Chief Conservator, Forests gave

approval for constitution of an Expert Committee for creating

the Buffer Zone surrounding the core area. Thereafter, on 7 th

March 2008, the Conservator, TATR submitted the proposed
23
demarcation to the Chief Conservator of Forest for creating

the Buffer Zone surrounding the core area of TATR.        The

consultation of the Gram Sabha happened only between May

2008 and November 2008, i.e., much after the cut-off date.

Subsequently, on 8th October 2008, the Conservator, TATR

submitted the revised proposal for Buffer Zone to TATR.

After numerous other deliberations, including the one with

National    Tiger   Conservation   Authority    (NTCA),   the

Government of Maharashtra issued a notification on 5 th May

2010 notifying 1101.7711 sq. km. as the Buffer Zone of

TATR. As such, the notification dated 5th May 2010, which

included the area where Lohara Coal Blocks were situated,

will have to be construed to be a ‘Change in Law’. It is only

because of issuance of the said notification, the coal block,

which would have otherwise been available to APML, was not

available to it.
46. It is further clear from the record that MoC had

allocated Lohara Coal Blocks vide allocation letter dated 6 th

November 2007 and MoEF granted the ToR for Lohara Coal

Blocks on 16th May 2008 pursuant to EAC’s recommendation
24
in the meeting dated 28th April 2008. A perusal of the said

letter of MoC dated 6th November 2007 would clearly reveal

that allocation of Lohara West and Lohara Extension Coal

Block to APML has been specifically made to meet the coal

requirements of their 1000 MW power plant in District

Gondia, Maharashtra.      It is, thus, clear that the bid

submitted by the appellant on the cut-off date was on the

basis of the assurance that the coal would be available to it

from Lohara Coal Blocks. Had the notification dated 5 th May

2010 not been issued, APML could have utilized the coal

from Lohara Coal Blocks which was allotted to it by MoC.

Apart from that, it is to be noted that MSEDCL was a part of

the Expert Committee which was constituted by MERC vide

its order dated 21st August 2013. Having participated in the

proceedings of the meeting of the Expert Committee,

MSEDCL cannot be permitted to take a stand contrary to the

decision of the said Expert Committee.
47.   It is further to be noted that deallocation of Lohara

Coal Blocks was not on account of any fault of APML and
25
this is recognized by CIL itself, inasmuch as it has returned

the Bank Guarantee which was furnished by APML.
48. We find that no interference would be warranted with

the   concurrent   findings   of   MERC    and   APTEL   that

deallocation of Lohara Coal Blocks would amount to ‘Change

in Law’ event as defined under the PPA.
49. Insofar as methodology is concerned, APTEL has

referred to the report of the Expert Committee appointed by

MERC, which recommended determination of the price of

coal from Lohara Coal Blocks using “transfer pricing method”

which is one of the commonly used methods. It has accepted

the report of the Expert Committee which provided a

reasonable methodology to arrive at the cost of mining from

Lohara Coal Blocks.      It will be relevant to refer to the

following paragraphs of the impugned judgment and order:
“8.9 We also observe that MSEDCL ought not
      to cast aspersions on such use of methodology
      of transfer pricing to deduce/determine the
      coal cost. Expert Committee Report was
      furnished after carrying out a detailed exercise
      of analysing all relevant technical, commercial,
      and financial aspects through a consultative
      process. The Expert Committee had also
      appointed external industry experts i.e. legal
      consultant, financial experts and independent
26
auditors. Admittedly, the Expert Committee
took cognizance of view of all the stakeholders
(including MSEDCL) and it is not the case of
MSEDCL that it was not heard before
submission of the Report to MERC. In fact, we
are mindful of the fact that the cover letter
submitted     to    MERC      records     MSEDCL
representative being one of the members which
submitted the Report. As such, we see no
reason why the recommendations of the
Expert Committee cannot be relied upon.
8.10 It is also not a case where MSEDCL
produced any document to contradict such
determination of Lohara coal cost by Expert
Committee. We therefore hold that MERC
ought to have conducted a prudence check to
arrive at a conclusion regarding the
correctness       of     the        figures     so
derived/determined towards coal costs by the
Expert Committee. Prudence check, however,
does not mean taking linkage coal cost as the
base to grant or determine change in law
compensation to Adani. The MERC clearly fell
in error on this issue.
8.11 The MERC's erroneous approach erodes
the restitutionary principle enshrined under
Article 13
of the PPA. In fact, Adani submitted
that the Lohara coal cost cross-subsidizes fuel
cost from Linkage portion, which has also been
noted by the Expert Committee in its Report,
but ignored by MERC. MSEDCL has not
disputed this fact.
8.12 The Expert Committee Report further
notes that based on the said cost parameters,
Adani had arrived at two different bid streams
for each of the fuel source (i.e. captive coal and
linkage coal). The overall bid numbers were
based on a weighted average of the individual
bid streams. Observing thus, in Chapter 7, the
Expert Committee suggested MERC to
27
consider the Lohara coal cost to be considered
as the base for restituting Adani. Expert
Committee gave the following rationale for the
recommended methodology:
"7.1 ... The company had entered
      into a PPA based on the assurance
      of one of the instrumentality of GoI
      to provide the coal mine. Therefore,
      other instrumentality of a state
      government may need to consider
      the fact of subsequent non-
availability of coal mine. This fact
      has     been       acknowledged    by
      MERC….”
8.13 We are in agreement with this rationale.
This rationale conforms to the Tribunal's
findings in the judgment dated 14.09.2019
(Appeal No 202 of 2018 & 305 of 2018) (Adani
Rajasthan judgment) wherein it was held that:
"11.13. The purpose of change in
      law relief/compensation is to restore
      the affected party to the same
      economic position as if the change
      in law had not occurred. In the
      instant case, this would involve
      compensating Adani Rajasthan for
      the cost incurred in purchasing
      alternate coal to meet the non-
availability    of    domestic   coal
      promised under the NCDP 2007.
      The MoP letter of 31.07.2013 as well
      as the Revised Tariff Policy of 2016
      support       the      principle   of
      compensation to the generators for
      the additional cost incurred in
      procuring     alternate    coal. The
      methodology proposed by Adani
      Rajasthan prima facie appears to be
      consistent with the principle/basis
      of compensation for shortfall/non-
28
availability of domestic coal given by
     the MoP and we do not find any
     reason to interfere with the same."
8.13 In the aforesaid case, the principle which
was considered by us is that to restore the
affected party to the same economic position
as prevailing at the time of bid submission, the
affected party shall be compensated for any
additional cost incurred in procuring alternate
coal to mitigate the nonavailability/shortfall of
coal from the bid-identified source. Since the
bid identified source of coal in the aforesaid
case was linkage coal, the compensation
allowed by the Tribunal was the difference
between alternate coal cost and linkage coal
cost. The formula for such computation is:
Compensation = A - B [where 'A' is cost of
alternate coal and 'B' is cost of coal from the
bid-identified source of fuel i.e. linkage coal.]
Here, we find it important to note that the
methodology approved in Adani Rajasthan
Judgment has not been interfered with by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order dated
31.08.2020 in Jaipur Vidyut Vitran Nigam v.
Adani Power Rajasthan Limited and Anr. (Civil
Appeal No. 8625-8626 of 2019).
8.14 Applying the same ratio as held in Adani
Rajasthan     Judgment,     the   formula    for
compensation for non-availability of coal from
Lohara Coal Blocks should have been
Compensation = A - B [where, 'A' is cost of
alternate coal and 'B' is cost of coal from the
bid-identified source of fuel i.e. Lohara Coal
Blocks.] Considering linkage coal cost as base
will not restitute Adani to the same economic
position as if no change in law had occurred
and thus runs contrary to the mandate
laid
down by
the Energy Watchdog Judgment, the
29
Uttar Haryana Judgment and the revised Tariff
Policy 2016.
8.15 Adani further prayed before to direct
MSEDCL that in so far as the costs incurred
towards transportation of coal from the Lohara
Coal Blocks to Tiroda TPS is concerned the
same may be considered based on applicable
Railway Freight with applicable taxes and
duties, while determining the landed cost of
coal from the Lohara Coal Blocks. We are in
agreement with this contention. It is no longer
res integra that landed cost of coal includes
transportation    costs.    Supreme     Court's
judgment in
Nabha Power Ltd. vs. Punjab State
Power Corp. Ltd.
(2018) 11 SCC 508 is locus
classicus on the subject wherein it was held
that    landed     costs     cannot    exclude
transportation costs viz.:-
"64. We fail to appreciate as to how
     these costs can be excluded, as the
     transportation costs to the project
     site have to be compensated to the
     appellant. It is not qualified by the
     methodology       of    transfer,  i.e.,
     railways or road. It is also a matter
     of necessity, since the railway siding
     had not reached the project site due
     to some complications in acquisition
     of    land.    It    is    really   the
     transportation cost from point to
     point which would be involved and
     the mere mention in the RFP under
     project related activity/milestone
     about Railway siding and the
     Railway lines from nearby station to
     site cannot imply that the Railways
     is the only mode of transportation
     when the siding has not been made,
30
albeit on account of land acquisition
           problems."
8.16 We, therefore, hold that MSEDCL ought
     to pay Lohara coal cost as base (including
     transportation costs) while compensating
     Adani for the change in law events. This issue
     is decided accordingly and the Impugned
     Order on this issue is set aside.”
50. It could thus be seen that the finding of APTEL is based

on the report of the Expert Committee, which was ignored by

MERC.     The Expert Committee had found that APML had

entered   into   a   PPA   based    on   the   assurance   of   an

instrumentality of the Government of India that coal would

be provided to it from the Lohara Coal Blocks. However, on

account of the reasons that have been elaborately discussed,

Lohara Coal Blocks, which was allocated to APML, came to

be deallocated for no fault on the part of APML. It is to be

noted that the Expert Committee, while arriving at its

finding, had also appointed external industry experts, i.e.

legal consultant, financial experts and independent auditors.

It is worthwhile to mention that one of the Members of the

said Expert Committee was a representative of MSEDCL.

What has been granted under the said methodology is the
31
additional cost of transport which APML would be required to

incur for transporting the coal from other locations on

account of deallocation of Lohara Coal Blocks. We, therefore,

find no reason to interfere with the said finding with regard

to methodology of arriving at the compensation payable on

account of ‘Change in Law’ event.
51. The appeals are, therefore found to be without merit

and, as such, are dismissed.
52. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.

No costs.
…..….......................J.
                                                [B.R. GAVAI]



                                     …….........................J.
                                           [VIKRAM NATH]


NEW DELHI;
APRIL 20, 2023.
32