[Cites
15
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ashok Gulabrao Bondre vs Vilas Madhukarrao Deshmukh on 12 April, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
B.R. Gavai
1


2023 INSC 724
                                                             REPORTABLE



                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                        CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         CRIMINAL APPEAL NO. 1931 OF 2011


         ASHOK GULABRAO BONDRE                    …APPELLANT(S)

                                       VERSUS

         VILAS MADHUKARRAO DESHMUKH
         AND OTHERS                             …RESPONDENT(S)


                                   JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.     The appeal arises on a very narrow canvass.
2.     The appellant had filed a complaint against the respondents

         alleging that the respondents had committed the offence punishable

         under Sections 191, 192, 196, 463, 464, 465, 467, 470 and 471 read

         with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short, “
IPC
”).
3.   The main allegation made by the appellant is that respondent

         No.2 ­ Ramprasad Pancheshwar had prepared false and forged

         documents, namely, personal recognizance bond and surety bond in

         Criminal Case No. 19 of 2003 and the rest of the respondents

         conspired and actively helped respondent No.2 for forging the said
2
documents.
4.  It is the case of the appellant that those documents had been

eventually filed on record in Criminal Case No. 19 of 2003 pending

against the appellant before the Judicial Magistrate First Class,

Ramtek (hereinafter referred to as the “JMFC”).
5.  The learned Judicial Magistrate First Class vide order dated 6 th

November 2004 dismissed the complaint. Being aggrieved thereby, the

revision petition came to be filed.
6.    Learned Additional Sessions Judge, Nagpur vide order dated 14 th

March 2005 has held that such a complaint could not have been filed

except in writing of the Court concerned or some other Court, that too

a subordinate one.
7.   Learned Additional Sessions Judge, however, found that the

allegations made by the revision petitioners were serious in nature,

and therefore, directed that if any application is filed by the appellant

under
Section 340
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (for short,

“
Cr.P.C
.”), the learned JMFC would make a suitable preliminary

enquiry   and   thereafter,   record       his   finding   to   that   effect   as

contemplated under
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C.
8.   The said order passed by the Revisional Court came to be

challenged by the appellant before the High Court in an application

filed under
Section 482
of the Cr.P.C. The same came to be rejected.

Hence, the present appeal.
9.  We have heard Mr. Sachin Patil, learned counsel appearing for
3
the appellant and Mr. Rahul Chitnis and Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha

Pande, learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
10. Mr. Sachin Patil submits that the alleged forgery had not been

committed during the pendency of the proceedings. It is submitted

that it is the contention of the appellant that the respondents had

forged the documents earlier and used them in the proceedings

initiated against the appellant. It is, therefore, submitted that the bar

of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. would not be applicable.
11. Mr. Sachin Patil has relied on the judgment of the Constitution

Bench of this Court in the case of
Iqbal Singh Marwa and Another

v. Meenakshi Marwah and Another1
.
12. Mr. Sachin Patil further submits that though the judgment of the

Constitution Bench was cited before the learned Single Judge of the

High Court, it did not consider the same in correct perspective.
13. Mr. Rahul Chitnis, on the contrary, submits that the appellant

has already accepted the order passed by the Revisional Court and

filed an application under
Section 340
of the Cr.P.C. before the learned

Magistrate. He further submits that, on account of the interim relief

granted in the present appeal, the said application could not be

proceeded further. He submits that as such, the question that is

involved in the present matter is purely an academic question in which

the Court should not go.
14. Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, supports the submission made by

1 (2005) 4 SCC 370
4
Mr. Rahul Chitnis.
15. The narrow question that requires to be considered is as to

whether the embargo under
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C. would be

applicable when the allegation that the documents which are sought to

be used as evidence were already fabricated and forged prior to filing

in evidence.
16. This Court, in the case of
Surjit Singh and Others v. Balbir

Singh2
, had taken a view thus:
“10. It would thus be clear that for taking cognizance
      of an offence, the document, the foundation of forgery, if
      produced before the court or given in evidence, the bar
      of taking cognizance under
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
gets
      attracted and the criminal court is prohibited from
      taking cognizance of offence unless a complaint in
      writing is filed as per the procedure prescribed under
Section 340
of the Code by or on behalf of the Court.
      The object thereby is to preserve purity of the
      administration of justice and to allow the parties to
      adduce evidence in proof of certain documents without
      being compelled or intimidated to proceed with the
      judicial process. The bar of
Section 195
is to take
      cognizance of the offence covered thereunder."
17.   Subsequently, this Court, in the case of
Sachida Nand Singh

and Another v. State of Bihar and Another3
, took the view thus:
“11. The scope of the preliminary enquiry envisaged in
Section 340(1)
of the Code is to ascertain whether any
      offence affecting administration of justice has been
      committed in respect of a document produced in court
      or given in evidence in a proceeding in that Court. In
      other words, the offence should have been committed
2 (1996) 3 SCC 533
3 (1998) 2 SCC 493
5
during the time when the document was in custodia
      legis.
12. It would be a strained thinking that any offence
      involving forgery of a document if committed far outside
      the precincts of the Court and long before its production
      in the Court, could also be treated as one affecting
      administration of justice merely because that document
      later reached the court records.
*               *               *
23. The sequitur of the above discussion is that the bar
      contained in
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of the Code is not
      applicable to a case where forgery of the document was
      committed before the document was produced in a
      court."
18.   Finding the two conflicting views taken with regard to the

interpretation of
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C., the question was referred

to the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of
Iqbal Singh

Marwa
(supra). It will be relevant to refer to paragraph 7 of
the said

judgment
, which is as under:
“7.   On a plain reading clause (b)(ii) of sub­section (1)
      of
Section 195
is capable of two interpretations. One
      possible interpretation is that when an offence
      described in
Section 463
or punishable under
Section
      471
,
Section 475
or
Section 476
IPC is alleged to have
      been committed in respect of a document which is
      subsequently produced or given in evidence in a
      proceeding in any Court, a complaint by the Court
      would be necessary. The other possible interpretation is
      that when a document has been produced or given in
6
evidence in a proceeding in any Court and thereafter an
      offence described as aforesaid is committed in respect
      thereof, a complaint by the Court would be necessary.
      On this interpretation if the offence as described in the
      Section is committed prior to production or giving in
      evidence of the document in Court, no complaint by
      Court would be necessary and a private complaint
      would be maintainable. The question which requires
      consideration is which of the two interpretations should
      be accepted having regard to the scheme of the Act and
      object sought to be achieved.”
19.   After observing the aforesaid and considering the entire scheme

under
Section 195
of the Cr.P.C., so also under
Section 340
of the

Cr.P.C., this Court observed thus:
“33. In view of the discussion made above, we are of the
      opinion that Sachida Nand Singh has been correctly
      decided and the view taken therein is the correct view.
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
Cr.P.C. would be attracted only
      when the offences enumerated in the said provision
      have been committed with respect to a document after it
      has been produced or given in evidence in a proceeding
      in any Court i.e. during the time when the document
      was in custodia legis.
34. In the present case, the will has been produced in
      the Court subsequently. It is nobody's case that any
      offence as enumerated in
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
was
      committed in respect to the said will after it had been
      produced or filed in the Court of District Judge.
Therefore, the bar created by
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
Cr.P.C. would not come into play and there is no
      embargo on the power of the Court to take cognizance of
      the offence on the basis of the complaint filed by the
      respondents. The view taken by the learned Additional
      Sessions Judge and the High Court is perfectly correct
      and calls for no interference.”
7
20.   It could thus clearly be seen that this Court, on unequal terms,

has held that the view taken in the case of
Sachida Nand Singh
(supra) that
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of the Cr.P.C. would be attracted only

when the offence enumerated in the said provision was committed in

respect of a document after it has been produced or filed in evidence

during proceedings before any Court, i.e. during the time when the

document is custodia legis. The Court has clearly held that, insofar as

the Will which is alleged to have been fabricated before it was

produced in the Court, the embargo created by
Section 195(1)(b)(ii)
of

Cr.P.C. would not come into play.
21. It has been held that in such a case, the Court will be entitled to

take cognizance of the offence only on the basis of the complaint made

by the complainant.
22. In that view of the matter, we find that the view taken by the

Revisional Court as well as the High Court is not sustainable.
23. The impugned judgment and order passed by the Revisional

Court as well as the High Court are quashed and set aside.
24. The matter is remitted back forthwith to the learned JMFC,

Ramtek for considering the complaint of the appellant on its own

merits.
25. Taking into consideration that the litigation is pending for almost

a decade, we request the learned JMFC to decide the complaint of the

appellant on merits as expeditiously as possible and in any case
8
within a period of one year from today.
26. We further make it clear that we may not be understood to have

expressed any opinion on merits and nothing observed herein should

be construed to have bearing on the merits of the matter.
27.   The appeal is disposed of in the above terms.
28.   Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
….........................J.
                                                              [B.R. GAVAI]




                                                     ...........................J.
                                                         [SANJAY KAROL]


NEW DELHI;
APRIL 12, 2023.
9
ITEM NO.104                 COURT NO.8                SECTION II-A

               S U P R E M E C O U R T O F      I N D I A
                       RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS

Criminal Appeal    No(s).   1931/2011

ASHOK GULABRAO BONDRE                                 Appellant(s)

                                   VERSUS

VILAS MADHUKARRAO DESHMUKH & ORS.                     Respondent(s)
Date : 12-04-2023 This appeal was called on for hearing today.

CORAM :
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.R. GAVAI
          HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY KAROL

For Appellant(s)
                     Ms. Anagha S. Desai, AOR
                     Mr. Sachin Patil, Adv.
Mr. Satyajit A Desai, Adv.
Mr. Siddharth Gautam, Adv.
Mr. Gajanan N Tirthkar, Adv.
Mr. Abhinav K. Mutyalwar, Adv.
Mr. Yougant Dhillon, Adv.
For Respondent(s)
                     Mr. Rahul Chitnis, Adv.
Ms. Shwetal Shepal, Adv.
Mr. Aditya Kumar, Adv.
Mr. Chander Shekhar Ashri, AOR

                     Mr. Aaditya Aniruddha Pande, AOR
                     Mr. Siddharth Dharmadhikari, Adv.
                     Mr. Bharat Bagla, Adv.
Mr. Sourav Singh, Adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
                             O R D E R
1.   The appeal is   disposed of in terms of the signed order.
2.   Pending application(s), if any, stand(s) disposed of.
(DEEPAK SINGH)                                  (ANJU KAPOOR)
COURT MASTER (SH)                                COURT MASTER (NSH)
[Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file]