[Cites
24
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Ravinder Singh vs State on 25 April, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Kumar
Bench:
Sanjay Kumar
,
Abhay S. Oka
1

                                                             Reportable



               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
              CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


              Criminal Appeal No. 1031 of 2023
        (@ Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 1214 of 2018)




Ravinder Singh                             ...   Appellant (s)



                             Versus



The State Govt. of NCT of Delhi.           ...   Respondent (s)



                        JUDGMENT
Sanjay Kumar, J
1.         Convicted and sentenced for the dastardly and most depraved

of offences – the rape of his own 9-year-old daughter, the appellant is

before this Court.
2
2.         By judgment dated 18.02.2013 in Sessions Case No. 01 of

2013, the learned Additional Sessions Judge (Special Fast Track Court),

Dwarka Courts, New Delhi, held the appellant guilty under
Sections 376
,
377
and
506
IPC. By order of sentence dated 23.02.2013, the appellant

was imposed with imprisonment for life under
Section 376
IPC and

payment of fine of ₹25,000/-; imprisonment for life under
Section 377
IPC

and payment of fine of ₹25,000/-; and rigorous imprisonment for

2 years under
Section 506
IPC along with payment of fine of ₹10,000/-.

Default in payment of fines entailed further periods of imprisonment.

In addition thereto, the learned Additional Sessions Judge directed that the

appellant should not be given any clemency by the State before he spent

at least 20 years in jail. In appeal, a Division Bench of the Delhi High Court

upheld the appellant’s conviction and sentence, vide judgment dated

01.09.2017 in Criminal Appeal No. 1509 of 2014. Hence, this appeal by

special leave under
Article 136
of the Constitution.
3.         By order dated 19.03.2018, this Court issued notice to the

State only on the question of sentence.
4.         Heard Mr. Sudhir Naagar, learned counsel for the appellant;

and Ms. Sonia Mathur, learned senior counsel, appearing for the State.
3
5.         As the scope of this appeal has been restricted to the sentence

imposed upon the appellant, we need not dilate on or deal with the issues

raised vis-à-vis the merits of his conviction for the offences under
Sections

376
,
377
and
506
IPC.
6.
Section 376(2)
IPC, prior to its amendment with retrospective

effect from 03.02.2013 by the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2013
,

consisted of clauses (a) to (g). Section 376(2)(f), as it stood then, provided

that whoever commits rape on a woman when she is under 12 years of

age shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall

not be less than 10 years but which may be for life and shall also be liable

to fine.
Section 377
IPC states that whoever voluntarily has carnal

intercourse against the order of nature with any man, woman or animal

shall be punished with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either

description for a term which may extend to 10 years, and shall also be

liable to fine. It was in exercise of power under
Sections 376(2)(f)
and
377
IPC that the learned Additional Sessions Judge sentenced the appellant to

life imprisonment, as the victim was merely 9 years of age and was also

subjected to carnal intercourse against the order of nature. He, however,

added the rider that the appellant should not be given clemency by the
4
State until he spent at least 20 years in jail. In effect, the appellant was

        sentenced to life imprisonment of a minimum term of 20 years.
7.              Imprisonment for life, in terms of
Section 53
IPC read with
Section 45
IPC, means imprisonment for the rest of the life of the prisoner,

       subject to the right to claim remission, etc., as provided under
Articles 72
and
161
of the Constitution and under
Section 432
Cr.P.C. In
Gopal

       Vinayak Godse Vs. State of Maharashtra
1 , this Court held that a

       sentence of imprisonment for life must, prima facie, be treated as

       imprisonment for the whole of the remaining period of the convicted

       person’s natural life.
In
Maru Ram Vs. Union of India
2, a Constitution

       Bench endorsed this view and affirmed that a life sentence is nothing less

       than life-long imprisonment and would last until the last breath.
Again, in
Union of India Vs. V. Sriharan
alias Murugan and others 3 , another

       Constitution      Bench    reiterated       that   imprisonment   for   life   means

       imprisonment for the rest of the life of the convict.
8.              However, in actual practice, one finds that a sentence of life

       imprisonment works out only to a term of 14 years, in terms of Section 433
1
AIR 1961 SC 600
2
(1981) 1 SCC 107
3
(2016) 7 SCC 1
5
Cr.P.C
., and may prove to be grossly inadequate to the gravity of the

        offence for which the convict had been so sentenced.
In
Swamy

        Shraddananda Vs. State of Karnataka4
, this Court noted that the days of

        remission earned by a prisoner are added to the period of his actual

        imprisonment to make up the term of the sentence and the question that

        then arises is how such remission can be applied to life imprisonment, as

        the way in which remission is allowed can only apply to a fixed term of

        imprisonment and life imprisonment, being for the rest of the life, is

        indeterminate by nature. It was observed that, in the States of Karnataka

        and Bihar, remission is granted to life convicts by ‘deemed’ conversion of

        life imprisonment into a fixed term of 20 years by executive orders issued

        by the State Government, flying in the face of a long line of decisions by

        this Court, and no provision of law exists sanctioning such a course. It was

        pointed out that life convicts are granted remission and released from

        prison upon completing a 14-year-term, without any sound legal basis, and

        one can safely assume that the position would be no better in other States.

        This Court, therefore, took judicial notice of the fact that remission is

        allowed to life convicts in the most mechanical manner without any
4
(2008) 13 SCC 767
6
sociological or psychiatric appraisal of the convict and without proper

assessment as to the effect of an early release of a particular convict on

the society. This Court also noted that grant of remission is the rule and

remission is denied, one may say, in the rarest of rare cases. Faced with

this conundrum, while commuting a death sentence to life imprisonment
in

that case
, this Court pondered over what should be done in such a

situation. It was observed that, if the option is limited only to two

punishments - one, being a sentence of life imprisonment, for all intents

and purposes, of not more than 14 years, and the other, death, the Court

may feel tempted and find itself nudged into endorsing the death penalty

and such a course would indeed be disastrous. It was therefore held that a

far more just, reasonable and proper course would be to expand the

options and to take over what, as a matter of fact, lawfully belongs to the

Court, i.e., the vast hiatus between 14 years’ imprisonment and death, and

substitute a death sentence by life imprisonment or by a term in excess of

14 years and, further, to direct that the convict must not be released from

prison for the rest of his life or for the actual term as specified in the order,

as the case may be. It was emphasized that the Court would take recourse
7
to this expanded option primarily because, in the facts of the case, the

sentence of 14 years’ imprisonment would amount to no punishment at all.
9.          Affirming the view taken in
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra), the

majority opinion in
V. Sriharan
(supra) observed that it could be said

without any scope for controversy that, when by way of a judicial decision

after a detailed analysis, having regard to the proportionality of the crime

committed, it is decided that the offender deserves to be punished with the

sentence of life imprisonment, i.e., till the end of his life or for a specific

period of 20 years or 30 years or 40 years, such a conclusion should

survive without any interruption. It was, therefore, held that in order to

ensure that the punishment imposed, which is legally provided for in the

Penal Code read along with
Criminal Procedure Code
, operates without

any interruption, the inherent power of the Court concerned should

empower the Court, in public interest as well as in the interest of the

society at large, to make it certain that such punishment will operate, as

imposed, by stating that no remission or other liberal approach should

come into effect to nullify such imposition. It was further observed that no

prohibition is prescribed in the Penal Code, or for that matter any of the

provisions where death penalty or life imprisonment is provided for, that
8
imprisonment cannot be imposed for a specific period within the said life

span and, when life imprisonment means the whole life span of the person

convicted, it cannot be said that the Court which is empowered to impose

the said punishment cannot specify the period up to which the said

sentence of life should remain, befitting the nature of the crime committed.
The majority opinion, therefore, concluded by stating that the
ratio
laid

down in
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra), that a special category of

sentence, instead of death, can be substituted by the punishment of

imprisonment for life or for a term exceeding 14 years and that category

can be put beyond application of remission, is well founded. It was further

held that the power to impose a modified punishment within the

punishment provided for in the Penal Code for such specified offences can

only be exercised by the High Court and in the event of further appeal, by

the Supreme Court, and not by any other Court in the country.
10.        In the light of this settled legal position, it was clearly not within

the domain of the learned Additional Sessions Judge to impose a

restriction that the term of the appellant’s life imprisonment should be for

at least 20 years and that he should not be given any clemency till then.

Such power could only be exercised by the High Courts or by this Court.
9
No doubt, the Delhi High Court confirmed the sentence passed by the

learned Additional Sessions Judge but mere affirmation of the hollow

exercise of a power, that was not conferred, by the learned Additional

Sessions Judge does not qualify as an independent exercise by the High

Court and would not suffice in terms of the legal requirement. It is only the

High Courts or this Court that would have the power, upon proper

application of mind, to take recourse to special category sentencing,

depending upon the nature of the offence and its gravity. To that extent,

the sentence imposed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge was,

therefore, without legal basis.
11.        That being said, the fact still remains that the appellant was

held guilty of the most heinous of offences, viz., the rape of his

own little daughter. The trust and faith that a young girl would repose in her

father and the sanctity of the very relationship were destroyed by his

debauched and devastating acts. In such a situation, allowing him the

freedom to seek liberal remissions, so as to cut short his life imprisonment,

would be nothing short of a travesty of justice. Significantly,
Section 376
IPC was amended with retrospective effect from 03.02.2013. The

amended provision now reads very differently.
Section 376(2)
IPC has
10
been enlarged and presently comprises clauses (a) to (n). The new

Section 376(2)(f) states that whoever, being a relative, guardian or teacher

of, or a person in a position of trust or authority towards the woman,

commits rape on such woman, shall be punished with rigorous

imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 10 years, but which

may extend to imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for

the remainder of that person’s natural life, and shall also be liable to fine.

Further, Section 376(3) has been inserted in the statute book and it

provides that whoever commits rape on a woman under 16 years of age

shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be

less than 20 years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, which

shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person’s natural life,

and shall also be liable to fine. It may also be noted that the new Sections

376A, 376D and 376E, brought into the statute book by the
Criminal Law

(Amendment) Act, 2013
, and the new Sections 376AB, 376DA and 376DB

inserted therein by the
Criminal Law (Amendment) Act, 2018
, provide for

the enlarged punishment of life imprisonment for the remainder of the

convict’s natural life.
11
12.         In the case on hand, the new
Sections 376(2)(f)
and
376(3)
IPC would have had application had the offence been committed after

03.02.2013. However, as it is an admitted fact that the child was raped by

her father during the month of August, 2012, these amended provisions

would have no role to play.
Article 20(1)
of the Constitution of India would

come to the undeserving rescue of the appellant, as it provides that no

person shall be subjected to a penalty greater than that which might have

been inflicted under the law in force at the time of commission of the

offence. Suffice it to state, at this stage, that this Court is mindful of the

fact that the lawmakers deemed it fit and appropriate to provide for more

stringent punishment for the offence of rape in certain circumstances and

made it clear that when imprisonment for life is imposed upon the

perpetrator of the offence in those situations, such a perpetrator would be

liable to remain in prison for the remainder of his natural life.
13.          Notably, the law
laid down in
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra)

and
V. Sriharan
(supra), with regard to special category sentencing, was

in the context of cases where death sentence had been imposed and the

same was commuted to imprisonment for life. The question would then

arise as to whether the power of the High Courts and this Court to impose
12
a modified punishment, specifying the term of life imprisonment in excess

        of 14 years, can be exercised even in cases where the death sentence is

        not imposed.
Reference may be made to
Gouri Shankar Vs. State of

        Punjab5
, wherein the Trial Court passed a sentence of life imprisonment,

        directing that it shall be for the remainder of the convict’s natural life.

        Noting that such a direction could not be passed by the Trial Court, this

        Court considered it fit to order that the sentence of imprisonment for life
in

        that case
should mean till the remainder of the natural life of the convict.
Pertinent to note, this was not a case where death sentence was imposed

        and thereafter commuted to life imprisonment, as was the case in
Swamy

        Shraddananda
(supra) and
V. Sriharan
(supra).
On similar lines, in
Shiva Kumar @ Shiva @ Shivamurthy Vs. State of Karnataka
6, this

        Court was considering a case involving
Section 302
IPC, where the Trial

        Court had sentenced the appellant to undergo rigorous imprisonment for

        the rest of his life.
While noting that the power to impose a modified

        punishment providing for a specific term of incarceration or till the end of

        the convict’s life, as an alternate to death penalty, can be exercised only
5
(2021) 3 SCC 380
6
Criminal Appeal No. 942 of 2023, decided on 28.03.2023 = 2023 SCC OnLine SC 345
13
by the High Courts and the Supreme Court and not by any other Court, in

terms of the law
laid down in
V. Sriharan
(supra), this Court observed:
“12. In a given case, while passing an order of conviction
           for an offence which is punishable with death penalty, the Trial
           Court may come to a conclusion that the case is not a ‘rarest of
           the rare’ case. In such a situation, depending upon the
           punishment prescribed for the offence committed, the Trial Court
           can impose other punishment specifically provided in
Section 53
of the IPC. However, when a Constitutional Court finds that
           though a case is not falling in the category of ‘rarest of the rare’
           case, considering the gravity and nature of the offence and all
           other relevant factors, it can always impose a fixed-term
           sentence so that the benefit of statutory remission, etc. is not
           available to the accused. The majority view in the case of V.
           Sriharan cannot be construed to mean that such a power cannot
           be exercised by the Constitutional Courts unless the question is
           of commuting the death sentence. This conclusion is well
           supported by what the Constitution Bench held in paragraph 104
           of its decision, which reads thus:
“104. That apart, in most of such cases where death
                 penalty or life imprisonment is the punishment
                 imposed by the trial court and confirmed by the
                 Division Bench of the High Court, the convict
                 concerned will get an opportunity to get such verdict
                 tested by filing further appeal by way of special leave
                 to this Court. By way of abundant caution and as per
                 the prescribed law of the Code and the criminal
                 jurisprudence, we can assert that after the initial
                 finding of guilt of such specified grave offences and
                 the imposition of penalty either death or life
                 imprisonment, when comes under the scrutiny of the
                 Division Bench of the High Court, it is only the High
                 Court which derives the power under the Penal Code,
                 which prescribes the capital and alternate
                 punishment, to alter the said punishment with one
                 either for the entirety of the convict's life or for any
                 specific period of more than 14 years, say 20, 30 or
                 so on depending upon the gravity of the crime
                 committed and the exercise of judicial conscience
14
befitting such offence found proved to have been
                 committed.”
13. Hence, we have no manner of doubt that even in a
           case where capital punishment is not imposed or is not proposed,
           the Constitutional Courts can always exercise the power of
           imposing a modified or fixed-term sentence by directing that a life
           sentence, as contemplated by “secondly” in
Section 53
of the
           IPC, shall be of a fixed period of more than fourteen years, for
           example, of twenty years, thirty years and so on. The fixed
           punishment cannot be for a period less than 14 years in view of
           the mandate of
Section 433A
of Cr.P.C.”


      Holding so, this Court modified the sentence passed by the Trial

Court and directed that the appellant should undergo imprisonment for life

and should not be released till he completed 30 years of actual sentence.
14.        Significantly, both
Gouri Shankar
(supra) and
Shiva Kumar
(supra) were cases wherein the Trial Court could have imposed a death

sentence had the circumstances warranted it, as those cases arose under
Section 302
IPC. The question would then arise as to whether the power

to pass a modified sentence of life imprisonment would be available to the

High Courts and this Court even in cases where the law does not

prescribe the death sentence as one of the punishments and limits the

maximum punishment to imprisonment for life with nothing further, as in

the case on hand.
In this context, we may note that the observations made
15
in
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra) and
V. Sriharan
(supra) clearly indicate

the existence of such power, though the Court stopped short of declaring

so and linked the special category sentences passed in those cases to

substitution   for   a   death   sentence.
As   pointed   out   in
Swamy

Shraddananda
(supra), the Court would take recourse to the expanded

option primarily because the life sentence of 14 years imprisonment may

amount to no imprisonment at all in a given case. This observation is wide

enough to take within its ambit all sentences of life imprisonment.
Similarly,

in
V. Sriharan
(supra), the majority opinion noted that there is no

prohibition in the Penal Code, where death penalty or life imprisonment is

provided for, that imprisonment cannot be imposed for a specified period

within the said life span and when life imprisonment means the whole life

span of the convict, the Court which is empowered to impose the said

punishment would also have the power to specify the period up to which

the said sentence of life should remain, befitting the nature of crime. Again,

this edict would hold good for all sentences of life imprisonment. No doubt,

the majority opinion also linked it to capital punishment, by observing that

such special category of sentences could be substituted for death.
More

recently, in
Shiva Kumar
(supra), this Court affirmed that even in a case
16
where capital punishment is not ‘proposed’, Constitutional Courts would

have the power to impose a modified or fixed-term sentence.
15.        The above observations manifest the applicability of the same

principle in cases where the maximum punishment prescribed by law is

imprisonment for life with nothing further. Even in such cases, it would be a

parody of justice to allow the convicts so sentenced to avail the benefit of

remissions and the like, liberally conferred by the State, and cut short the

length of their life sentence to a mere 14 years. We are, therefore, of the

considered opinion that the law
laid down in
Swamy Shraddananda
(supra) and
V. Sriharan
(supra) with regard to special category sentencing

to life imprisonment in excess of 14 years by fixing a lengthier term would

be available to the High Courts and this Court, even in cases where the

maximum punishment, permissible in law and duly imposed, is life

imprisonment with nothing further. We must, however, hasten to add that

exercise of such power must be restricted to grave cases, where allowing

the convict sentenced to life imprisonment to seek release after a

14-year-term would tantamount to trivializing the very punishment imposed

on such convict. Needless to state, cogent reasons have to be recorded
17
for exercising such power on the facts of a given case and such power

        must not be exercised casually or for the mere asking.
16.            In the case on hand, the appellant was found guilty of one of

        the most monstrous and horrific of offences, viz, the physical violation of

        his own daughter, who was not even in the first flush of youth. In the event

        he secures release after putting in just 14 years in jail, his possible re-entry

        into his daughter’s life, while she is still in her twenties, may cause her

        further trauma and make her life difficult. His incarceration for a sufficiently

        long period would not only ensure that he receives his just deserts but also

        allow his daughter more time and maturity to settle down and move on

        with her life, even if her villainous father is set at liberty. We are, therefore,

        of the opinion that this is a fit and deserving case for exercise of the power

        vesting in this Court to impose a modified special category sentence of

        fixed-term life imprisonment. As pointed out by this Court in
Madan Gopal

        Kakkad Vs. Naval Dubey
and another7, Judges who bear the sword of

        justice should not hesitate to use that sword with utmost severity to the full

        and to the end, if the gravity of the offence so demands.
7
(1992) 3 SCC 204
18
17.        The ends of justice would be sufficiently served if the life

imprisonment of the appellant is for a minimum of 20 years of actual

incarceration before he can seek remissions under the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure
, 1973, or any other enacted law. We,

accordingly, direct so. Imposition of fines and imprisonment in default of

payment thereof shall stand confirmed.
The appeal is disposed of in terms of the above directions.
…………………………………….,J
                                                 (Abhay S. Oka)



                                         .……………………………………,J
                                                  (Sanjay Kumar)

April 25, 2023
New Delhi.