[Cites
2
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
K. Phanindra Reddy, I.A.S. vs G. Subramanian on 11 April, 2023
Author:
V. Ramasubramanian
Bench:
Pankaj Mithal
,
V. Ramasubramanian
1


                                                                 NON-REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                         SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (CIVIL) NO. 4163 OF 2023


          K. PHANINDRA REDDY, I.A.S. AND ORS.                      …PETITIONER (S)



                                                VERSUS


          G. SUBRAMANIAN                                          …RESPONDENT(S)

                                                  WITH

                 SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C)…………………………….of 2023
                           (Arising out of D.NO. 10656 OF 2023)

                                             JUDGMENT
V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN, J.
1.             Delay condoned in Special leave Petition (Civil) @ D.No.10656

          of 2023.
2.             While the first special leave petition arises out of an order

          passed by the Division Bench of the Madras High Court in an intra-

          court appeal challenging an order passed by the learned Judge in a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
POOJA SHARMA
Date: 2023.04.11
contempt petition, the other special leave petitions arise out of the
16:04:48 IST
Reason:
order passed substantially in a writ petition and in a review

          petition.
2
3.   We have heard Shri Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel

appearing for the petitioners in all the special leave petitions and

Shri Mahesh Jethmalani, Shri Guru Krishna Kumar, Dr. Menaka

Guruswamy, learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent.
4.   The brief facts sufficient for the disposal of all these special

leave petitions are as follows:-
(i)     A batch of 49 writ petitions were filed by the office
             bearers of the Rashtriya Swayam Sevak Sangh (RSS), on
             the file of the High Court of Judicature at Madras seeking
             a direction to the State, the Director General of Police, the
             Superintendents of Police of various districts and the
             Inspectors of Police of certain police stations to permit the
             members of the Organisation to conduct a procession
             (Route March) through identified places. The contention
             of the writ petitioners was that they wanted to hold the
             procession on 02.10.2022, but that their applications for
             permission to hold the Route March were not considered
             by the appropriate authorities;
(ii)    The batch of writ petitions were disposed of by a learned
             Judge of the Madras High Court, by an order dated
             22.09.2022, with certain directions;
(iii)   The State filed a batch of applications for review. At about
             the same time, one of the representations seeking
             permission to hold the march in Chennai was rejected by
3
the   local   Inspector       of   Police,   by   an   order   dated
       27.09.2022;
(iv)   The order of rejection led to a legal notice dated
       28.09.2022 followed by a Contempt Petition, against,
(i) The Secretary to Government, Home Department; (ii)
       The Director General of Police; (iii) The Superintendent of
       Police; and (iv) The Inspector of Police;
(v)    When the contempt petition came up for hearing on
       30.09.2022, the date on which the organisers wanted to
       conduct the Route March was only 48 hours away.
       Therefore, the learned Judge before whom the contempt
       petition came up, passed an order on 30.09.2022 to the
       following effect:-
“5. Hence, the respondents justified the
             reasons for rejecting the request made by the
             petitioners. Therefore, it is not possible for the
             respondents to grant permission for the
             procession to be held on 02.10.2022. However,
             this Court suggested for any other date except
             Gandhi Jayanthi i.e. 02.10.2022 to conduct
             procession and to conduct public meeting.
6. The learned Senior Counsels appearing for
             the petitioners suggested four dates i.e.
             09.10.2022,    16.10.2022,     06.11.2022    and
             13.11.2022 and the learned Senior Counsel
             appearing for the first respondent submitted that
             except Gandhi Jayanthi on 02.10.2022, they will
             consider the same representations of the
             respective petitioners seeking permission to
             conduct procession and to conduct public
             meetings on any other date.
7. Considering the above submissions made
             on either side, this Court fix the date to conduct
             procession and to conduct public meetings on
4
06.11.2022. Till then, the petitioners are directed
             not to precipitate the issue. However, it is for the
             State to maintain law and order problem. It is
             made clear that the respondents shall permit the
             petitioners on their earlier representations to
             conduct procession and to conduct public
             meetings on 06.11.2022.
8. Registry is directed to list the matter along
             with all the connected contempt petitions
             numbered subsequently on 31.10.2022”
(vi)   Pursuant to the aforesaid order dated 30.09.2022, the
       Director General of Police issued a memorandum dated
       29.10.2022 instructing Commissioners/Superintendents
       of Police of the Districts to pass necessary orders on the
       representations of the organisers;
(vii) In the light of the memorandum issued by The Director
       General of Police on 29.10.2022, the learned Judge before
       whom the contempt petitions came up on 31.10.2022,
       passed an order to the following effect:-
“The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
            petitioner produced the order passed by the second
            respondent viz., the Director General of Police, dated
            29.10.2022, thereby directing all the Commissioner of
            Police/Superintendent of Police, to pass order on the
            applications made by the respective petitioners in
            accordance with the order passed by this Court dated
            22.09.2022 in W.P.No.24540 of 2022 etc., batch.
Accordingly all the applications submitted by the
            petitioners are under consideration of the respective
            Commissioner of Police/Superintendent of Police and
            they are about to pass orders within a day or two.
2. Post the matter on 02.11.2022 under the
            caption “for reporting compliance” at 2.15 p.m.
(viii) On 02.11.2022, the Staff Officer in the Office of the
       Director General of Police filed a status report claiming
5
that in view of certain developments that took place after
       a cylinder blast in Coimbatore City on 23.10.2022, a
       fresh assessment of the local situation had to be made by
       the Commissioners/Superintendents of Police. In short,
       the status report indicated that, (i) it is not advisable to
       permit any processions/public meetings in 24 locations;
(ii) that processions/public meetings can be permitted in
       23 locations only in enclosed ground/premises; and
(iii) procession can be permitted in three locations;
(ix)   Incidentally, the contempt petitions as well as the
       applications for review were listed before the learned
       Judge on the very same date namely 02.11.2022. The
       learned Judge passed two independent orders, one in the
       batch of contempt petitions and another in the batch of
       review applications;
(x)    The relevant portion of the order passed in the review
       applications reads as follows:-
“3. Today when the matters are taken up for hearing,
            the learned State Public Prosecutor appearing for the
            petitioners submitted that out of 50 places, in three
            places, the respective respondents were granted
            permission to conduct procession and public meeting
            on 06.11.2022. Insofar as 23 places are concerned,
            respective respondents are permitted to conduct
            procession/public meeting in an indoor place. Insofar
            as 24 places are concerned, respective authorities
            found that there will be a law and order issue and
            rejected the requests in view of the intelligence report
            received from the authorities concerned. He further
            submitted that the respective respondents also
            approached this Court by way of Contempt Petitions
            and same are pending before this Court.
4.     In view of the various orders passed by the
            authorities concerned, nothing survive in these Review
6
Applications. Accordingly, all the Review Applications
            are closed. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous
            petitions are also closed.
(xi)   But in the batch of contempt petitions, the learned Judge
       passed an order adjourning the contempt petitions to
       04.11.2022, for passing appropriate orders after perusing
       the Intelligence Report produced by the State in a sealed
       cover;
(xii) On 04.11.2022 the learned Judge passed final orders in
       the contempt petitions, virtually modifying the original
       order passed on 22.09.2022. The operative portion of the
       Order passed on 04.11.2022 passed in the batch of
       contempt petitions reads as follows:
“9. Therefore, this Court is inclined to grant
            permission to conduct procession and public meeting
            on 06.11.2022 on the following conditions:-
i.    The procession and public meetings should be
            conducted in a compounded premises such as
            Ground or Stadium. It is made clear that while
            proceeding to conduct procession and public
            meeting, the participants shall go by walk or by their
            respective vehicles without causing any hindrance to
            the general public and traffic.
ii.    During the program, nobody shall either sing
            songs or speak ill on any individuals, any caste,
            religion, etc.,

            iii.  Those who participate in the program shall not
            for any reason talk or express anything in favour of
            organizations banned by Government of India. They
            should also not indulge in any act disturbing the
            sovereignty and integrity of our country.
iv.   The program should be conducted without
            causing any hindrance to public or traffic.
v.    The participants shall not bring any stick, lathi
            or weapon that may cause injury to any one.
7
vi.   The    organizer(s)  shall    make     adequate
          arrangements for drinking water and proper First
          Aid/Ambulance/Mobile Toilets/CCTV Cameras/Fire
          Fighting equipments etc., in consultation with the
          Police/Civic/Local Bodies as directed by the police.
vii.  The    organizer(s)   shall   keep    sufficient
          volunteers to help the police for regulation of traffic
          and the participants.
viii. Only box type speakers should be used and
          output of the speakers should not exceed 15
          watts~ad within a radius of 30 meters only. Cone
          Speakers should not be used at any cost.
ix.    In the procession, the processionists shall not
          by any manner offend the sentiments of any
          religious, linguistics, cultural and other groups.
x.    An undertaking to reimburse the cost for any
          damage     that   may    occur    enroute   to   any
public/private property and an undertaking to bear
          the compensation/replacement costs as well, if are to
          be awarded to any other institution/person, who may
          apply for the same.
xi.   If there is violation of any one of the conditions
          imposed, the concerned police officer is at liberty to
          take necessary action, as per law.”
(xiii) Aggrieved by the order so passed by the learned Judge on
     04.11.2022 in the batch of contempt petitions, a batch of
     intra-court appeals were filed by the organizers. These
     intra-court appeals were allowed by a Division Bench of
     the High Court by an order dated 10.02.2023. The
     operative portion of the order of the Division Bench reads
     as follows:-
“33.    In the result, the order dated 04.11.2022
          passed in the contempt petitions, which is under
          challange in the present LPAs, is set aside, and
          the order dated 22.09.2022 passed in the writ
          petitions stand      restored   and would      be
          enforceable. As the dates on which the appellants
8
wanted to conduct the route-march, have passed,
          it is only appropriate that a direction be issued in
          this regard. Accordingly, the appellants are
          directed to approach the State authorities with
          three different dates of their choice for the
          purpose of holding the route-march/peaceful
          procession and the State authorities are directed
          to grant permission to the appellants on one of
          the chosen dates out of the three. The
          organization shall ensure that strict discipline is
          followed at their end and that there is no
          provocation or incitement on their part. The State
          on the other hand has to take adequate safety
          measures and make traffic arrangements to
          ensure that the procession and the meeting shall
          go on peacefully.”
(xiv) Challenging the order of the Division Bench passed in the
     intra-court appeals arising out of the order passed in the
     contempt petitions, the Secretary to Government, Home
     Department,    the    Director    General    of   Police,   the
     Commissioner of Police and the Inspector of Police first
     came up with a special leave petition in Special Leave
     Petition (C) No.4163 of 2023. When this special leave
     petition   came up     for   orders as to      admission    on
     03.03.2023, it was submitted by Shri Mukul Rohatgi,
     learned senior counsel and Shri V. Krishnamurthy,
     learned AAG for the State of Tamil Nadu that the State
     would come up with some suggestions as to how best to
     resolve the issue. Therefore, Special Leave Petition (C)
     No.4163 of 2023 was adjourned to 17.03.2023.
(xv) Subsequently, the State filed the other special leave
     petitions challenging the earliest order of the learned
     Judge of the High Court dated 22.09.2022 passed in the
     batch of writ petitions as well as the order dated
9
02.11.2022 passed by the learned Judge in the batch of
          review applications.
(xvi) Thus we have      on hand, three special leave petitions, the
          first one arising out of the last order, namely, that of the
          Division Bench of the High Court dated 10.02.2023 and
          the other two special leave petitions arising out of the
          earlier   orders    of   the   learned   Single   Judge   dated
          22.09.2022 and 02.11.2022.
5.   Insofar as the first special leave petition is concerned, it arises

out of the order of the Division Bench passed in a batch of intra-

court appeals challenging the order passed by the learned Judge in

a batch of contempt petitions. This Court need not even go into

several aspects argued across the Bar, for the simple reason that

the learned Judge travelled beyond the scope of a contempt petition

and this is why the said order warranted interference by the

Division Bench.     After having disposed of the batch of main writ

petitions by a final order dated 22.09.2022 in a particular manner

and after having dismissed the batch of review applications on

02.11.2022, the learned Judge could not have modified his original

order dated 22.09.2022 in a batch of contempt petitions on

04.11.2022. Therefore, the Division Bench of the High Court was

justified in interfering with the order of the learned Judge. On this
10
short ground, Special Leave Petition (C) No.4163 of 2023 deserves

to be dismissed.
6.   Coming to the other special leave petitions, the same arise out

of the original order passed by the learned Judge on 22.09.2022 in

the batch of writ petitions and the order dated 02.11.2022 passed

in the batch of review applications. A perusal of the order of the

learned Judge shows that the learned Judge considered the scope

of
Sections 41
and
41A
of the Chennai City Police Act, 1888 and
Section 30
of the Police Act, 1861, to come to the conclusion that

the reliefs sought in the writ petitions deserved to be granted

subject to certain conditions. The operative portion of the order

dated 22.09.2022 reads as follows:
“11. In view of the above order passed by the
               Hon'ble Supreme Court of India as well as
               various orders passed by this Court, it would be
               appropriate to direct the respondents to grant
               permission to conduct procession and to conduct
               public meeting on 02.10.2022 at various places
               subject to the following conditions on or before
               28.09.2022:-
i.    During the program, nobody shall either
                     sign songs or speak ill on any individuals,
                     any caste, religion, etc.,

               ii.   Those who participate in the program shall
                     not for any reason talk or express anything
                     in favour of organizations banned by
                     Government of India. They should also not
                     indulge in any act disturbing the
                     sovereignty and integrity of our country.
11
iii.    The program should be conducted without
        causing any hindrance to public or traffic.
iv.     The participants shall not bring any stick,
        lathi or weapon that may cause injury to
        any one.
v.      The organizer(s) shall make adequate
        arrangements for drinking water and
        proper      First  Aid/Ambulance/Mobile
        Toilets/CCTV Cameras/ Fire Fighting
        equipments etc., in consultation with the
        Police/Civic/Local Bodies as directed by
        the police.
vi.     The procession shall proceed in any orderly
        manner along the sanctioned route keeping
        to the left and shall not halt on the way or
        cause impediment to the normal flow of
        traffic. The procession shall occupy only
        one-fourth of the road.
vii.    The organizer(s) shall keep sufficient
        volunteers to help the police for regulation
        of traffic and the participants.
viii.   The organizer(s) of procession/rally shall be
        responsible for ensuring that the route
        permitted to them by the Police Authorities
        is strictly followed.
ix.     Only box type speakers should be used
        and output of the speakers should not
        exceed 15 watts ad within a radius of 30
        meters only. Cone Speakers should not be
        used at any cost.
x.      In the procession, the processionists shall
        not any manner offend the sentiments of
        any religious, linguistics, cultural and other
        groups.
xi.      An undertaking to reimburse the cost for
         any damage that may occur enroute to any
         public/private   property    and      an
         undertaking       to      bear       the
         compensation/replacement costs as well, if
12
are to be awarded to any other
                       institution/person, who may apply for the
                       same.
xii.   If there is violation of any one of the
                       conditions imposed, the concerned police
                       officer is at liberty to take necessary action,
                       as per law.”
7.   The learned Judge not only interpreted the relevant provisions

of the law correctly but also imposed necessary conditions. This is

why the learned Judge could not review his own order.
8.   It is to be noted that the learned Judge in fact followed several

similar orders passed by the other Judges of the same High Court

including one of us (V. Ramasubramanian, J. as he then was at the

Madras High Court) in the past.
9.   As rightly contended by all the learned senior counsel on the

side of the respondent, the main objection raised by the State before

the High Court was that after the imposition of a ban order on

another organization, law and order problems cropped up in certain

places and that the same led to several cases being registered. The

details of those cases are actually furnished in the memorandum of

grounds of special leave petition(s). We do not wish to extract in this

order, the Chart provided by the State in Ground No.BB of Special

Leave Petition (C) No.4163 of 2023, on account of its sensitivities.

But the Chart provided by the State Government shows that the
13
members of the respondent organization were the victims in many

of those cases and that they were not the perpetrators. Therefore, it

is not possible for us to find fault with the order passed by the

learned Judge either in the main writ petitions or in the review

applications. Hence all the special leave petitions are liable to be

dismissed.
10. The Special Leave Petitions are accordingly dismissed. No

costs. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.
…………………………….. J.
(V. RAMASUBRAMANIAN)




                                          ………………………….. J.
(PANKAJ MITHAL)
New Delhi;
April 11, 2023