[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Sita Ram vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 12 April, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Abhay S. Oka
,
Pankaj Mithal
NON­REPORTABLE

                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                 CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                 CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.1029 OF 2023


                         SITA RAM                                     …APPELLANT



                                                  versus



                         THE STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH                 ...RESPONDENT


                                            J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.   The appellant is the original accused no.9.     The
                         appellant and the accused no.10 – Ram Bachan, were
                         convicted for the offence punishable under Section 302
                         read with
Section 34
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for
                         short, ‘
IPC
’). Accused nos. 1 to 8 were convicted for the
Signature Not Verified
offence punishable under
Section 325
read with
Section
                         149
of IPC. The appellant and the accused no.10 were
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.04.12
19:13:36 IST
Reason:
sentenced to undergo life imprisonment.       The accused

                Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 1 of 8
no.10 died during the pendency of the appeal before the
     High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.
2.     The incident is of 17th August 1984. According to
     the prosecution’s case, PW­1 Uday Raj Maurya, PW­2
     Ram Aadhar (father of PW­1) and Karam Hussain
     (deceased) were sitting near the doorsteps of the house of
     PW­1 and PW­2.           Their discussion was about irrigating
     the fields. According to the prosecution’s case, there was
     previous enmity between PW­1 and PW­2 on the one
     hand and the accused persons on the other. There was a
     case filed against the family of the accused no.1 in which
     PW­2 was a witness. According to the prosecution’s case,
     a decree was passed in favour of PW­1 and PW­2 and
     against accused no.7 Tufani. Moreover, PW­2 had filed
     the case against accused no.3 and accused no.4. While
     PW­1, PW­2 and the deceased were discussing the issue
     of irrigating their fields, the accused persons came there
     carrying bricks and bamboo sticks.                The appellant was
     carrying a spade.            At that time, accused nos.4 and 6
     shouted that PW­1, PW­2 and the deceased should be
     killed so that the case gets finished.             On hearing this,
     PW­1, PW­2 and the deceased ran towards the northern
     side of the house of PW­1. The accused persons chased
     and surrounded them.               The appellant attacked the
     deceased on his head with the blunt edge of the spade.
Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 2 of 8
He also attacked PW­2 by using the same weapon. After
     the deceased fell down, the accused continued to assault
     the said three persons with bamboo sticks.                     Karam
     Hussain, the deceased, succumbed to the injuries
     sustained due to the assault made by the appellant and
     the accused no.10. The prosecution examined eight
     witnesses, out of which, PW­1 and PW­2 were the eye­
     witnesses. The Sessions Court believed the testimony of
     PW­1 and PW­2 and convicted the accused. In the appeal
     before the High Court, the conviction of the appellant was
     confirmed. However, accused nos.1 and 2, who were the
     only other surviving accused, were acquitted.
SUBMISSIONS
3.     The learned counsel appearing for the appellant
     urged that both PW­1 and PW­2 admitted in the cross­
     examination that they had not seen which accused
     assaulted the deceased.               Moreover, three eyewitnesses
     who were present at the time of the incident were not
     examined. He, therefore, submitted that the conviction of
     the appellant cannot be sustained.
4.     The     learned       senior     counsel      representing   the
     respondent – State of Uttar Pradesh pointed out that both
     PW­1 and PW­2 have clearly stated that the appellant

Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 3 of 8
assaulted the deceased on his head with the blunt edge
     of the spade.        He submitted that the medical evidence
     supports the version of PW­1 and PW­2 as far as the
     assault by the appellant on the deceased is concerned.
     He submitted that both the Courts have believed the
     testimony of PW­1 and PW­2 as far as the assault on the
     deceased is concerned and that there was no perversity
     in the findings recorded by the Sessions Court and the
     High Court. He submitted that no interference be made
     with the conviction of the appellant.
OUR VIEW
5.     We have perused the evidence of PW­1 and PW­2.
     We may note here that the High Court has disbelieved
     their versions to the extent to which they deposed about
     the injuries received by them in the incident at the hands
     of the accused. In fact, there is a specific finding that the
     version of PW­1 and PW­2 about the assault on them
     does not inspire confidence.
6.     It is true that both PW­1 and PW­2, in their
     examination­in­chief, have stated that the appellant
     assaulted the deceased on his head with the blunt edge
     of the spade.       In the examination­in­chief, PW­1 stated
     that his father PW­2 fell on the ground due to the injuries

Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 4 of 8
sustained by him as a result of the assault made by
     bamboo sticks.          Thereafter, the deceased tried to run
     away when he was caught by one of the accused persons
     and thereafter, the appellant assaulted the deceased.
     PW­1, in paragraph 19 of his cross­examination, stated
     that he and PW­2 fell down as a result of the attack by
     the accused persons, and therefore, he had not seen
     which accused assaulted them with which weapon. He
     admitted that he is unable to tell which accused
     assaulted him. In the examination­in­chief, PW­1 did not
     state that he also fell down after he and his father were
     attacked.      The version of his father PW­2 is that after
     both of them fell down, there was an assault on the
     deceased.
7.     Now, coming to the testimony of PW­2, in his
     examination­in­chief, he stated that after two accused
     persons shouted that PW­1, PW­2 and the deceased
     should be killed, he started running away. He stated that
     he fell down due to an assault made by the accused, and
     thereafter, PW­1 fell down. He stated that thereafter, the
     appellant assaulted the deceased. In paragraph 10 of the
     cross­examination of PW­2, he stated that he and his son
     PW­1 were beaten at the same time.              However, he
     accepted that he had not seen who had assaulted whom.
     The version of PW­1 and PW­2 in the cross­examination

Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 5 of 8
creates serious doubt as to whether they had seen any
     particular accused assaulting the deceased.
8.     There is another important aspect of the matter.
     PW­1, in his examination­in­chief, stated that when he,
     PW­2 and the deceased were being assaulted, after
     hearing their shouts, Munif, Murtaza and Iltaf rushed
     there. They stopped near the house of one Funnu and
     shouted at the accused to leave PW­1, PW­2 and the
     deceased.       However, the accused continued to assault
     them.      Even PW­2 stated that the witnesses, Munif,
     Murtaza and Iltaf came to the spot where he was being
     assaulted along with other villagers.                   It must also be
     noted      here    that      in   paragraph        20    of   the   cross­
     examination, PW­1 stated that many villagers have seen
     the incident, including the witness Munif.                     PW­6 Shiv
     Narayan Singh, who had investigated the offence, stated
     in his examination­in­chief that he had recorded the
     statements of witnesses Munif, Iltaf and Murtaza.
     However, he has not stated any reason for not examining
     these three independent eyewitnesses.                         In fact, in
     paragraph 15 of the cross­examination of PW­2, he stated
     that witness Munif had come to the Court on the very day
     on which his evidence was recorded, but he had become
     hostile.
Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 6 of 8
9.     As observed earlier, there is serious doubt whether
     PW­1 and PW­2 had really seen the appellant assaulting
     the deceased with the blunt edge of the spade. There was
     a prior enmity between the two eyewitnesses and the
     accused.          Moreover,       at     least       three   independent
     eyewitnesses were available whose statements under
Section 161
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
     short, ‘
Cr.P.C
.’) were admittedly recorded. One of them
     (Munif) admittedly attended the Court but was not
     examined.       It is true that when there are a number of
     eyewitnesses,        the      prosecution’s           case   cannot   be
     disbelieved on the ground that few of the eyewitnesses
     were not examined, especially when the version of the
     eyewitnesses        examined       before        the    Court,   inspires
     confidence. In the present case, version of PW­1 and PW­
     2 does not inspire confidence. That is how the failure of
     the     prosecution          to   examine            three   independent
     eyewitnesses whose statements were recorded, becomes
     very relevant.        Moreover, one of the three witnesses
     attended the Court but was not examined. Considering
     the fact that the testimony of PW­1 and PW­2 who were
     allegedly injured witnesses, cannot be believed, adverse
     inference will have to be drawn on account of the
     prosecution’s failure to examine the three eyewitnesses.
Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 7 of 8
10.    Therefore, we hold that the prosecution has failed to
     prove the guilt of the appellant beyond a reasonable
     doubt. Hence, the conviction of the appellant under the
     impugned judgment and orders is set aside, and the
     appellant is acquitted of the charges framed against him.
     The order dated 8th February 2021 passed by this Court
     records that the appellant has surrendered.             We,
     therefore, direct that the appellant shall be forthwith set
     at liberty unless he is required in connection with any
     other case. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
….……………J.
                                                  (Abhay S. Oka)
1.
.………………J.
                                                 (Pankaj Mithal)
     New Delhi;
April 12, 2023.
Criminal Appeal No.1029 of 2023
Page 8 of 8