[Cites
10
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Madhya Pradesh vs Phoolchand Rathore on 28 April, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
Bench:
Aravind Kumar
,
Sanjay Kishan Kaul
REPORTABLE

                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                   CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                              CRIMINAL APPEAL NOS. 1315-1316 OF 2023
                              (Arising out of SLP (Criminal) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019)

                         STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH                           … Appellant

                                                    VERSUS

                         PHOOLCHAND RATHORE                                … Respondent




                                                     JUDGMENT
MANOJ MISRA, J.
1.         Leave granted.
2.         These appeals are by the State of Madhya
                         Pradesh against the judgement and order of the High
                         Court of Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur (for short “the
                         High Court”) dated 11.12.2015 in Criminal Appeal
                         No.1292 of 2015 connected with Criminal Reference
                         No.2 of 2015 whereby, the order of conviction and
                         sentence including death penalty awarded to the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
RASHMI DHYANI
respondent by the Court of District and Sessions
Date: 2023.04.28
16:50:17 IST
Judge, Anuppur in Sessions Trial No.72 of 2010,
Reason:
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019     Page 1 of 36
under
sections 302
and
201
of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 (for short “
IPC
”) has been set aside and
the respondent has been acquitted.
3.         To have a clear understanding of the issues
raised in these appeals a brief description of the
prosecution case and the evidence led by the
prosecution would be apposite.
Introductory Facts
4.         The prosecution story narrated in the first
information report (FIR), lodged by deceased’s brother
Kamla (PW2), is that the accused-respondent was
unhappy that his wife Sundariya (the deceased) had
kept her jewellery with her sister Jaimatiya Bai (PW-
8); on the fateful day i.e. 01.02.2010, at around 1400
hours, the accused came to the house of PW2, while
PW8 was there, fought with PW8 and told her that he
would kill Sundariya and set the house on fire; when
PW2 returned from his shop at around 1900 hours,
on getting the above information, he telephoned
Madhuri (PW4), daughter of Sundariya, who informed
PW2 that her father had taken her mother on a
bicycle towards the field while making utterances
that he would kill her. On receipt of information from
PW4, PW2 came to the village where Sundariya
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019   Page 2 of 36
resided and went to search her out with the help of
Manoj (not examined) and PW2’s brother-in-law
Mathura (PW3). During the course of search, they
found the deceased lying seriously injured between
the railway tracks. They, therefore, rushed her to
Jaithari Hospital but, on way, she succumbed to her
injuries. The FIR was promptly lodged at P.S. Jaithari
on 01.02.2010 at 2130 hours expressing suspicion
against the respondent (i.e. the accused) of having
killed his wife.
5.         As per arrest memo (Ex. P-11), the accused
was arrested on 02.02.2010, at about 1240 hours,
from Seoni Tri-section. Vide Ex. P-9, on the same day
i.e.    02.02.2010,            at    1300         hours,   a     disclosure
statement of the accused was recorded wherein, he
assured recovery of stones (gitti) and blood-stained
pant and shirt kept in his hut. Pursuant thereto, vide
seizure memo (Ex. P-10), on 02.02.2010, at 1400
hours, a moss coloured full shirt and dark brown full
pant with blood stains on them, three blood-stained
stones with hair stuck on it and one old hero jet cycle
were recovered from that hut.
6.         Interestingly, on the same day, at the same
time i.e. 1400 hours, vide Ex. P-12, another seizure
was made from near the railway line of 5 blood-
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                Page 3 of 36
stained gravel (gitti - stone), 5 plain gravel (gitti -
stone),       blood       stained        red      coloured       saree     and
chappals.
7.         On completion of the investigation, a charge-
sheet was laid against the appellant and, after taking
cognizance thereon, the case was committed to the
Court of Session. The Sessions Court charged the
appellant for committing murder of his wife on
01.02.2010 at 2000 hours, punishable under
section
302
IPC,       and        of      concealing          blood-stained
stones/shirt/pant and cycle used in the offence with
a view to remove evidence thereof, punishable under
Section 201
IPC. The accused pleaded not guilty and
claimed trial.
Prosecution Evidence
8.         As there existed no eyewitness account of the
murder,         the      prosecution              rested   its      case        on
circumstances, inter alia, (a) the accused bore a
grudge against his wife for keeping jewellery with her
sister (PW8); (b) on the fateful day, during day time,
accused on that count, quarrelled with PW8 and
threatened to kill the deceased and set the house on
fire; (c) in the evening of that fateful day, the accused
quarrelled with the deceased and took her with him
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                  Page 4 of 36
on a bicycle, while extending threats that he would
kill her; (d) later, that evening, the deceased was
found in a seriously injured condition; (e) the
deceased died on account of those injuries; and (f)
blood-stained clothes etc. were recovered at the
instance of the accused thereby making the chain
complete.         To      prove        these        circumstances,      the
prosecution examined 12 witnesses. Gist of their
testimony is noticed below:
(i)    PW-1 - Ganga Bai
                   She is the aunt of the accused. She did
             not support the prosecution case and was
             accordingly declared hostile. Nothing much
             turns on her testimony.
(ii) PW-2 – Kamla                       Singh       Rathore       (the
           informant)

                   He       deposed          about       —    receipt       of
information, at 1900 hours, of the quarrel
             that took place on the fateful day during day
             time;      search        operation;         discovering    the
             deceased, at around 2000 hours, in an
             injured condition near railway track; rushing
             her to the hospital; the deceased succumbing
             to her injuries on way to the hospital; and
             lodging         of      the          FIR.   During     cross-
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 5 of 36
examination,             PW2         admitted     that         no
             quarrel/fight took place in his presence. On
             being        questioned              as   to    how      PW2
             communicated with PW4 on that fateful day,
             PW2 stated that PW4 had used mobile of
             some third person but could not disclose his
             name or number.
(iii) PW-3 – Mathura Prasad Rathore
                   He corroborated PW2’s statement that
             the deceased was found lying near the
             railway tracks and from there she was
             rushed to Hospital though she succumbed to
             her injuries on way.
(iv) PW-4 – Madhuri Singh Rathore (Daughter
           of the deceased)

                   She is the star witness. She deposed
             about — fights between her father (the
             accused) and mother (the deceased); her
             returning from maternal uncle’s home at
             1630 hours and noticing her father and
             mother fighting/quarrelling and, later, her
             father forcibly taking her mother on his cycle
             to the fields. PW4 also stated that she
             followed them up to the village pond but, on
             being scolded, she came back and that near
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 6 of 36
the pond, she met Sushila (PW-12), her
             paternal aunt, to whom she narrated the
             incident. Whereafter, on coming back, she
             made a phone call to her maternal uncle
             (PW2). Then her maternal uncle called back
             to know the whereabouts of her mother.
             When she told him that her father had taken
             her mother and had asked her to remain in
             the house, her maternal uncle came to the
             village in search of her mother. PW4, during
             her deposition, added that in between her
             father had returned alone and had told her
             that he had killed her mother.
During              cross-examination,       PW4
             admitted that the ornaments that were kept
             by her mother with her aunt (i.e. mother’s
             sister) were returned by her aunt eight days
             before the incident. She also admitted that
             on the fateful day she gave her examination
             from 1100 hours till 1500 hours and that, at
             present, she is living with her maternal
             uncle. PW4 was also confronted with her
             previous statement wherein there was an
             omission regarding confession made by her
             father.
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019        Page 7 of 36
(v) PW-5           –     Dr.      Sunil       Khanna      (Autopsy
             Surgeon)
                   He proved the autopsy report (Ex.P-8)
             wherein he recited eight lacerated wounds,
             ante mortem in nature, caused by hard and
             blunt object within 24 hours of examination
             conducted on 02.02.2010 at 1100 hours
             According to his opinion, deceased died
             within 24 hours of the examination, on
             account          of     head         injuries   leading        to
             haemorrhage, resultant shock and cardio
             respiratory failure.
During cross examination, he stated that
             if train is moving and any person, walking on
             foot, gets dashed by the train then such
             injuries may occur.
This       witness         was     re-examined      and
             questioned by Court. At that stage, the
             witness stated that if injuries were sustained
             during a train accident then it might reflect
             fracture on face. He accepted the possibility
             of injuries being caused as a result of assault
             with Gitti (Gravel - small stones).
(vi) PW-6 – Shivkumar Rathore
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 8 of 36
He      is    a     witness      to    the     disclosure
             statement           and      seizure    of    blood-stained
clothes etc. He, however, did not support the
             prosecution case and was therefore declared
             hostile.           During        cross-examination                he
             admitted             his         signature          on        the
             memorandum(s)                 but    claimed         that     his
             signatures were obtained by the police at the
             police station without informing him about
             the contents of the documents.
(vii) PW-7 – Kiran @ Rambai
                   She is another daughter of the deceased.
             She stated that at the time of the incident,
             she was in the house of her maternal uncle
             namely, Kamla Rathore, at Jaithari. During
             cross examination, she stated that disputes
             between her father and mother used to take
             place but they use to get resolved.
(viii)       PW-8 – Jaimatiya Bai Rathore
                   She is sister of the deceased Sundariya.
             She deposed that the dispute between the
             deceased and her husband was on account
             of     ancestral           properties        coming         from
             deceased’s mother side. She stated that she
             does not have any other information about
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                 Page 9 of 36
the incident. At this stage, the witness was
             declared hostile and was allowed to be cross-
             examined by the prosecution.
During           cross-examination,       at     the
             instance of prosecution, she stated that there
             was theft at Sundariya’s place therefore, for
             security reasons, Sundariya had kept her
             gold and silver at her house which, a week
             before the incident, were sent by her to the
             house of Sundariya. She also stated that the
             accused had come to her house and had
             threatened to kill Sundariya and set the
             house on fire.
During           cross-examination        at     the
             instance of the accused, upon a suggestion
             that a family dispute was going on, PW8
             stated the accused was pressurising the
             deceased to take a share in her ancestral
             property from her brother and since she was
             not agreeing to it, the accused had a dispute
             with her.
(ix) PW-9 – Rajiv Singh
                   He was the Halqa Patwari (Revenue
             Circle Inspector/Lekhpal) who inspected the
             crime scene under orders of the Tehsildar
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019          Page 10 of 36
and prepared the spot panchnama (Ex. P-13)
             as also site plan (Ex. P-14) of the place from
             where the deceased was taken in an injured
             condition to the hospital.
(x) PW-10 – Ashok Kumar Rathore
                   He is son of PW2 who brought his vehicle
             to take the deceased along with PW2 to the
             hospital. He corroborated the evidence that
             the deceased succumbed to her injuries on
             way to the hospital.
(xi) PW-11 – Satish Dwivedi - Investigating
           Officer

                   He       proved        the      various     stages        of
             investigation including registration of the FIR
             on 01.02.2010 at 2130 hours. Interestingly,
             as per his deposition, he visited the site on
             02.02.2010 and vide seizure memo (Ex.P-12)
             lifted     blood-stained             gravel,   plain   gravel,
             blood-stained saree and two slippers from
             the spot. He deposed about — arresting the
             accused vide memo Ex.P-11; recording his
             disclosure vide Ex.P-9; and effecting recovery
             vide memo (Ex.P-10). He stated that sealed
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 11 of 36
articles were sent for forensic examination.
He also produced the recovered articles as
             material exhibits.
During cross-examination, though PW11
             admitted knowing PW2 (informant) from
             before but denied the suggestion that he
             conspired with PW2 to falsely implicate the
             accused. In paragraph 25 he stated that
             saree was not found on the body of the
             deceased. He also admitted that a new
             railway track was being laid there and in that
             connection machines were there. However, he
             denied the suggestion that in connection
             with laying new track hundreds of workers
             (labourers) were there. In paragraph 32 he
             denied the suggestion that the accused had
             reached the police station on 01.02.2010
             itself. He also denied the suggestion that the
             alleged arrest, disclosure and recovery at the
             instance of the accused are bogus.
In respect of the distance between Seoni
             Trisection and Seoni village, PW11 denied
             the suggestion that the distance between the
             two is of 6 km. Rather, claimed it to be 600
             meters. He also admitted that the witnesses
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019   Page 12 of 36
of the memorandum were not residents of
             Seoni Trisection.
(xii) PW-12 – Sushila (Sister-in-Law of the
            Deceased)

                   PW-12 disclosed no knowledge about the
             prosecution case and was therefore declared
             hostile.
Forensic Reports
9.         In addition to the oral testimony of the
witnesses, forensic reports confirmed presence of
human blood on saree, shawl, petticoat, blouse, shirt
and stone. Likewise, blood was found on the gravel
recovered from the place of occurrence though its
origin       could        not      be      determined   as   it   had
disintegrated. Similarly, the classification of the blood
could not be made as it had disintegrated.
Statement under section 313 Cr.P.C.
10.        The incriminating circumstances appearing in
the prosecution evidence were put to the accused
while recording his statement under
section 313
of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short
“
Cr.P.C
.”) The accused denied the incriminating
circumstances and claimed that he has been falsely
implicated.
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019         Page 13 of 36
Findings of the Trial Court
11.          The     Trial        Court           found   the    following
incriminating            circumstances              proved   —    (a)   the
deceased was assaulted, abused and forcibly taken
by the accused on a bicycle and she did not return
thereafter rather, two hours later, was found in badly
injured condition; (b) the accused made extra judicial
confession of his guilt to his daughter (PW4); (c)
human blood was found on the clothes recovered;
and (d) except bald denial no explanation was offered
by the accused. According to the trial court, the said
circumstances constituted a chain so far complete
that it established beyond doubt that it was the
accused and no one else who committed the crime.
To conclude as above, the Trial Court placed reliance
on the testimony of PW-4. Upon finding the accused
guilty, the trial court convicted the accused and
awarded death penalty to him under
section 302
IPC
and      7    years       RI     under
section     201
IPC.   For
confirmation of death penalty, a reference was made
to the High Court under
section 366
Cr.P.C., which
was registered as Reference No.2 of 2015.                           In the
meantime, the accused filed criminal appeal against
the order of conviction and sentence, which gave rise
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 14 of 36
to Criminal Appeal No.1292 of 2015 before the High
Court. The appeal and the reference were connected
and decided together by the High Court vide
impugned judgment and order dated 11.12.2015.
High Court Findings
12.        The High Court set aside the judgment and
order of the trial court and acquitted the appellant.
While doing so, it discussed the testimony of
prosecution’s star witness i.e. PW 4 in paragraphs 29
and 30 and did not find the prosecution evidence
reliable and trustworthy for the reasons recorded by
it in paragraphs 31, 32, 33, 34 and 35 of its
judgment, which are extracted below:-
“31.      This statement of Madhuri (PW-4) the
      main witness to the case becomes doubtful in view
      of the several omissions and contradictions
      contained therein. The first is the fact that she
      states that her father took her mother forcibly on
      the cycle and while doing so he was seen by Ganga
      Bai (PW-1) and Sushila (PW-12) but both these
      witnesses have clearly denied this fact or any
      knowledge about the incident and have been
      declared hostile. Secondly, this witness Madhuri
      (PW-4) in her statement, on the one hand, states
      that her father came back after committing the
      crime in bloodstained clothes, changed them in the
      night of 1.2.2010, hid them in the cattle shed and
      thereafter washed the clothes in the morning of the
      next day and spread them to dry on the roof
      whereas in the same paragraph she has stated that
      her father the accused appellant was arrested in the
      night of the incident i.e. 1.2.2010 from the ‘nala’
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019   Page 15 of 36
with an axe in his hand. Thirdly, it is also apparent
      that she states that her father hid the clothes in the
      house itself and subsequently he washed and dried
      them in the house itself whereas the bloodstained
      clothes of the accused appellant are said to have
      been seized from the hut situated in the field vide
      seizure memo Exhibit P-9 and seizure panchnama
      Exhibit P-10. The statement of Madhuri (PW-4) is in
      direct conflict with and in contradiction of the
      prosecution story which in turn makes it clear that
      one of them is false thereby casting a deep shadow
      of doubt on the case against the appellant.
32. From a perusal of the aforesaid facts and
      circumstances it is also clear that:
(1) the statement made by Madhuri (PW-4) is
           unreliable and is full of embellishments,
           exaggerations as well as contradictions and
           omissions on account of the fact that her
           statement regarding fighting between the
           appellant on account of jewellery is apparently
           false in view of the clear and specific statement
           of Jaimataiya Bai (PW-8) who has emphatically
           stated that she had returned the jewellery eight
           days before the incident;
(2) her statement regarding constant fighting
           between her parents on account of the jewellery
           is not corroborated and supported by her elder
           sister Kiran @ Rambai (PW-7) who has in fact
           stated that the fight between her parents was
           usual and normal fight between husband and
           wife;
(3) that she has stated that her father, after
           committing the crime, returned back with
           bloodstained clothes, hid them in the cattle
           shed, changed his clothes and went away and
           thereafter washed his clothes in the morning of
           the next day after the incident i.e. on 2.2.2010
           whereas in the same breath she has also
           asserted that her father was arrested on the
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019    Page 16 of 36
same night of the incident itself i.e. on 1.2.2010
           by the police with an axe in his hand whereas
           there is no mention in her statement to the effect
           that her father had gone to the field with an axe
           in his hand or that he had taken the axe after
           the incident from the cattle shed.
(4) There is also material contradiction in her
           statement to the effect that she had gone to her
           maternal uncle’s house to give her examination
           whereas in her own statement she has stated
           that her mother told her to go to her maternal
           uncle’s house.
(5) Her statement is also quite unnatural
           inasmuch as she has stated the fact that she
           rang her maternal uncle Kamal (PW-2) informing
           him about the incident but did not inform her
           paternal uncle or any of her neighbours or
           persons residing nearby.
33. It is also pertinent to note that a bare perusal of
      the case diary statement of Madhuri, Exhibit P-38,
      and the statement made by her in Court clearly
      indicates that there is omission and contradiction in
      regard to the alleged extra-judicial confession made
      by the accused to Madhuri (PW-4) as she has not
      stated anything about any such extra-judicial
      confession in her case diary statement. In fact, this
      contradiction     and    omission,    deficiency  and
      weakness in the statement of Madhuri (PW-4) has
      also been taken note of by the court below in paras
      33 and 44 of its judgment but the court below has
      chosen to ignore the same on the ground that there
      is a mistake committed by the prosecutor in
      recording of her statement and the interest of justice
      demands that the omissions and contradictions be
      ignored.
34. The fact that her father had taken her mother
      forcibly to the field and had told her that he would
      murder her mother but she did not inform this fact
      to either her paternal uncle who is her neighbour or
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019     Page 17 of 36
any other neighbour residing nearby or any other
      person residing in the locality or her acquaintance
      except her maternal uncle who was residing 2 kms
      away also casts a shadow of doubt upon her
      statement as this conduct is unnatural.            The
      aforesaid      omissions,       contradictions     and
      embellishments in the statement of Madhuri (PW-4)
      when     read    with    the     uncorroborated    and
      unsupported unnatural statements made by her to
      the effect that her father told her on three occasions
      that he would murder her mother and after
      committing the crime again came back and
      confessed to the commissions of the crime which
      confession was not disclosed by her in her case
      diary statement makes it clear that her statement
      cannot be said to be of unimpeachable and sterling
      quality and cannot be relied upon as it does not
      satisfy the tests laid down by the Supreme Court in
      the above referred judgments.
35. In view of the aforesaid detailed analysis of the
      evidence of Madhuri (PW-4) we arrive at a
      conclusion that her statement is full of
      embellishments,      exaggerations   and    material
      discrepancies and, therefore, we find ourselves
      unable to pick out the grain of truth from the
      falsehood of her statement.”
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019    Page 18 of 36
13.        In addition to above, the High Court noticed
that neither younger sister of Madhuri (PW4) nor
neighbours or members of the locality were produced
as witnesses to lend assurance to the prosecution
story. Further, the original motive for the crime was a
dispute arising from keeping of jewellery by the
deceased with her sister, whereas the statement of
prosecution witnesses established that the jewellery
had      been       returned         much         before   the   incident,
therefore, there existed no cogent motive for the
crime. In paragraph 40 of the judgment, the High
Court observed that the recovery of blood-stained
clothes and stones was doubtful because the seizure
witness Shiv Kumar Rathore (PW6) had categorically
denied seizure of those articles in his presence and
had stated that his signatures were obtained at the
police station.              Moreover, the evidence recorded
revealed that the accused was arrested in the night of
01.02.2010 itself. The High Court also noticed that
the FSL report Ex.P-35 could not confirm the blood
group on the clothes as to match it with the
deceased. Otherwise also, once the seizure of articles
became doubtful and as per the statement of PW4
the accused had washed off those clothes and had
kept them in the house to dry, the entire prosecution
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 19 of 36
story in respect of seizure of blood-stained clothes
from the hut was rendered doubtful. Taking a
conspectus of the circumstances highlighted above,
the High Court opined that the case set up by the
prosecution appeared extremely unnatural and hard
to believe.          The High Court therefore discarded the
circumstance of seizure of stones and blood-stained
clothes from the hut of the accused and upon finding
that         there    were      glaring           contradictions    in    the
prosecution case, irreconcilable in nature, gave the
benefit of doubt to the accused.
14.          We have heard learned counsel for the parties
and have perused the record.
Submissions on behalf of the Appellant
15.          The     learned         counsel         for   the     appellant
submitted that this is a case where a daughter has
deposed against her own father. The testimony of PW-
4     is      straightforward           and        coupled   with        other
evidences establishes beyond doubt the following:
(i)    that there used to be fights/quarrels
              between the deceased and the accused;
(ii) that on the fateful day, there was a
              quarrel between the two; and
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 20 of 36
(iii) that soon after the quarrel the deceased
             was taken on a bicycle by the appellant
             to the field and shortly thereafter near
             the hut/field of the accused, on a railway
             track, the deceased was found in a
             seriously injured state suggesting that
             she was badly assaulted.
16.        It was argued that the High Court wrongly
discarded the entire statement of PW4 upon noticing
that she was not truthful on certain aspects, namely,
— the accused had returned alone from the field
wearing blood-stained clothes, changed his clothes in
the house, washed them and made an extra judicial
confession to PW4. It was contended that falsus in
uno, falsus in omnibus doctrine is not applicable in
India therefore, the High Court ought to have severed
the unreliable part from the remaining part, noticed
above, and examine whether the remaining part on
its own could sustain conviction, particularly, when
there was no explanation forthcoming from the
accused as to where he was during that period and
how his wife sustained those injuries. It was argued
that the evidence that the accused took the deceased
on cycle to the field and shortly thereafter, near the
field, in between railway tracks, the deceased was
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019   Page 21 of 36
found with multiple injuries, by itself, in absence of
any explanation from the accused as to when he
parted company of the deceased, was sufficient to
record conviction.
17.        In addition to the above, the learned counsel
for the appellant submitted that it is a case where the
deceased         had      died      at     around   2000     hours     on
01.02.2010, the FIR was promptly lodged at 2130
hours narrating the circumstances in which the
incident occurred and those circumstances have been
confirmed by the testimony of prosecution witnesses
therefore,           even         if       subsequent       story          of
confession/recovery                 is     discarded,   the      proven
circumstances by itself form a chain so complete as
to sustain conviction of the accused as justifiably
recorded by the trial court. Consequently, it was
prayed, the judgment and order of the High Court be
set aside and the Trial Court’s judgment and order be
restored.
Submissions on behalf of the respondent -accused
18.        Per contra, the learned counsel for the
respondent submitted that the view taken by the
High Court is a plausible view and is not perverse as
to warrant an interference under
Article 136
of the
Constitution of India.                   It was urged that the High
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019            Page 22 of 36
Court is a final court of fact and the view of the High
Court is not in ignorance of any evidence or by
misreading any piece of evidence. Its view being a
plausible view, based on analysis of the evidence, no
interference with it is called for, particularly when the
case rests on circumstantial evidence.
19.        It was also urged that the testimony of PW4,
when read as a whole, does not inspire confidence as
it is found unreliable on several aspects therefore,
being the sole witness of the circumstance that the
deceased was taken from home by the accused, could
not on its own form the basis of conviction. More so,
when the original motive stood not proved giving rise
to possibility of false implication on account of
property dispute with informant (PW2) as would be
clear from the statement of PW8, which possibility
gains support from the statement of the Investigating
Officer (PW11) that he had known the informant
(PW2)        from       before.        More       so,   when   a    false
arrest/disclosure and recovery was set up. It was
also argued that the public witnesses examined by
the prosecution have disclosed about the arrest of
the accused in the night itself whereas, the police
witnesses have tried to disclose his arrest on the next
day leaving them opportunity to plan a case against
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019            Page 23 of 36
him. For all the reasons above, it was prayed, the
view taken by the High Court is a plausible view, not
liable to be interfered.
Discussion and Analysis
20.        Having         considered          the   submissions     and
perused the record, before we proceed further, it
would be useful for us to notice the law as to when it
would be appropriate for this Court, exercising its
power under
Article 136
of the Constitution of India,
to reverse an acquittal into a conviction. Normally,
the Court is reluctant to interfere with an order of
acquittal. But when it appears that the High Court
has on an absolutely wrong process of reasoning and
a legally erroneous and perverse approach to the
facts of the case and ignoring some of the most vital
facts, acquitted the respondent and the order of
acquittal passed by the High Court has resulted in a
grave       and       substantial           miscarriage   of    justice,
extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 136
of the
Constitution of India may rightfully be exercised (See:
State of U.P. v. Sahai & Others1
).
21.
In
State of M.P. & Others v. Paltan Mallah
& Others2
,               reiterating the same view it was
observed:
1 (1982) 1 SCC 352
2 (2005) 3 SCC 169
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019           Page 24 of 36
“8. … This being an appeal against acquittal, this
           Court would be slow in interfering with the
           findings of the High Court, unless there is
           perverse appreciation of the evidence which
           resulted in serious miscarriage of justice and if
           the High Court has taken a plausible view this
           Court would not be justified in interfering with
           the acquittal passed in favour of the accused and
           if two views are possible and the High Court had
           chosen one view which is just and reasonable,
           then also this Court would be reluctant to
           interfere with the judgment of the High Court.”
22.
In a recent decision rendered by this Court in
Basheera Begam v. Mohd. Ibrahim & Others3
, it
was observed:
“190. … Reversal of a judgment and order of
           conviction and acquittal of the accused should
           not ordinarily be interfered with unless such
           reversal/acquittal is vitiated by perversity. In
           other words, the court might reverse an order of
           acquittal if the court finds that no person
           properly instructed in law could have upon
           analysis of the evidence on record found the
           accused to be “not guilty”. …”
23.        Seen in light of the decisions above, we would
examine whether there is any perversity in the view
taken by the High Court while converting conviction
into an acquittal. Admittedly, this is a case based on
circumstantial evidence. There is no direct eye
witness account of the murder.                    The body of the
deceased was not found within the confines of her
house but in the open on a railway track. In such
3 (2020) 11 SCC 174
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019       Page 25 of 36
circumstances to sustain a conviction the court
would        have       to     consider           —   (i)   whether      the
circumstances relied by the prosecution have been
proved beyond reasonable doubt; (ii) whether those
circumstances are of a definite tendency unerringly
pointing towards the guilt of the accused; (iii)
whether those circumstances taken cumulatively
form a chain so far complete that there is no escape
from       the      conclusion           that      within     all    human
probability the crime was committed by the accused;
(iv) whether they are consistent only with the
hypothesis of the accused being guilty; and (v)
whether they exclude every possible hypothesis
except the one to be proved.
24.        We shall now examine as to what were the
circumstances relied by the prosecution and as to
how they were sought to be proved. Additionally, we
shall examine as to how the High Court dealt with
the evidence on those circumstances with a view to
find out whether there is any perversity in its view/
reasoning warranting an interference. In the instant
case,      the      prosecution           relied      on    the     following
circumstances: (a) Motive; (b) Disclosure Statement
and Recovery; (c) Extra Judicial Confession; and (d)
Accused taking the deceased with him and soon
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019               Page 26 of 36
thereafter the deceased was found in an injured
state. We shall examine each of these circumstances,
separately, herein below—
(i) Motive:
According           to      the        prosecution,       the
      appellant and the deceased used to quarrel
      because the deceased had kept her jewellery
      with her sister. However, the above reason for
      the quarrel was not found proved because
      the prosecution evidence led revealed that
      the jewellery had already been returned back
      much        before       the      date      of   the   incident.
      Therefore, to prove motive, during trial,
      prosecution developed another story, which
      is, that the appellant desired his wife to claim
      a share in her ancestral property which
      resulted in quarrels. This motive neither
      appealed to the High Court nor to us
      because, firstly, it was an improvement in the
      prosecution            story;       secondly,      not     much
      evidence was laid to substantiate the same;
      and, thirdly, if the wife is killed how could
      her husband derive interest in the property.
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                Page 27 of 36
Thus, in our view, the prosecution failed to
      prove the motive set out by it. No doubt
      absence of motive by itself may not be
      sufficient to dislodge the prosecution case if
      the other proven circumstances could form a
      chain so complete as to indicate that in all
      human probability it is the accused and no
      one else who committed the crime but, in a
      case       based       on      circumstantial   evidence,
      motive plays an important part. Because, not
      only it makes the story believable but also
      helps the court in fortifying an inference
      which may be drawn against the accused
      from other attending circumstances.
(ii) Disclosure Statement and Recovery
           The prosecution placed heavy reliance on
      recovery of blood-stained clothes and stones
      from the hut of the accused on the basis of
      disclosure made by him. The disclosure as
      well as recovery has been refuted by the
      accused as also by PW-6 who is a witness to
      it. The High Court has noticed that there is
      material contradiction in the statement of
      prosecution witnesses with regard to the
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019        Page 28 of 36
time when the accused was arrested. The
      public          witnesses            examined        by      the
      prosecution indicated that the accused was
      arrested in the night of 01.02.2010 itself,
      whereas         the      police      witnesses/documents
      disclosed his arrest on 02.02.2010 at 1240
      hours at Seoni Trisection. What may be
      interesting is the time sequence of arrest,
      recording          of     disclosure         statement       and
      preparing of recovery memos.
According to police witnesses and papers,
      the arrest was effected on 02.02.2010 at
      1240 hours; the disclosure statement was
      recorded on 02.02.2010 at 1300 hours and
      recovery was effected on 02.02.2010 at 1400
      hours. The arrest of the accused was shown
      from a place known as Seoni Trisection
      whereas the public witnesses including PW4
      stated that the accused was arrested in the
      night of 01.02.2010 from a Nala (drain)
      where he was hiding with an axe. The
      disclosure              statement,           as     per      the
      memorandum                (Ex.P-9),         was   prepared    at
      Seoni Trisection and witnessed by PW6; the
      recovery            memo           (Ex.P-10),        as      per
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019             Page 29 of 36
memorandum, was prepared at Phoolchand’s
      (accused’s) hut near railway line in Model
      village at 1400 hours and the same too, was
      witnessed by PW6. Interestingly, PW6 is the
      only      public        witness         of    disclosure       and
      recovery to be examined and he has not
      supported the prosecution case. What is
      even more interesting is that the other
      seizure memorandum prepared in respect of
      lifting blood-stained saree, gravel, slippers
      etc. from near the railway line, that is the
      spot from where the deceased was lifted, was
      prepared at 1400 hours on 02.02.2010. How
      could it be possible that the police prepared
      two memorandums at the same time at
      different places. The answer to it lies in the
      testimony of PW6, a witness to both, who
      stated that he was made to sign the papers
      at the police station. Meaning thereby that all
      papers were prepared at one go rendering the
      entire          exercise          of         disclosure        and
      consequential discovery/recovery doubtful.
      Not only that, there appears no cogent
      reason for the accused to carry stones from
      the spot and hide them in his hut while
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                 Page 30 of 36
leaving several blood-stained stones near the
      railway        line.     In     such        circumstances,    it
      appears to us that those stones were picked
      from the spot near the railway track to show
      recovery from the hut.                        Insofar as the
      recovery          of      blood-stained           clothes     is
      concerned, in addition to the above reasons,
      the same is doubtful also because of the
      statement of PW4 (Madhuri) that her father
      on return had washed those clothes and had
      spread them to dry over the cattle shed in
      the house therefore, how could they be
      recovered from the hut. It be noted that the
      house is shown located in the village,
      whereas the hut is shown in the field at quite
      a distance from the house.                        For all the
      reasons above, the High Court was justified
      in doubting the recovery of blood-stained
      clothes etc. at the instance of the accused
      from the hut and on the basis of a disclosure
      statement made by him.
(iii) Extra Judicial Confession to PW4
              The alleged extra judicial confession
      made by the accused to PW4 was neither
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019             Page 31 of 36
disclosed in the FIR nor in the previous
      statement of PW4 made during investigation.
      PW4 was confronted with that omission
      during her deposition in court. That apart,
      the testimony of PW4 with regard to the
      accused          returning         home,     making       extra
      judicial         confession,            changing       clothes,
      washing blood-stained clothes and spreading
      them to dry has been found unreliable and
      shaky by the High Court for cogent reasons
      extracted         above,        which       do   not    appear
      perverse as to warrant an interference. Thus,
      the circumstance of extra judicial confession
      is also not proved beyond doubt.
(iv) Accused taking the deceased from
           home on a bicycle

           In respect of this circumstance, the only
      evidence is of PW4 i.e. the daughter of the
      accused and the deceased. Her evidence has
      been doubted by the High Court, inter alia,
      on the ground that the two witnesses Ganga
      Bai (PW1) and Sushila (PW12) have not
      supported her statement. PW4 stated that
      when she followed her parents who were
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 32 of 36
going on a bicycle she met Sushila (PW12)
      and she narrated the incident to her. PW12,
      who appeared as a witness, denied having
      met PW4 on that fateful day. Similarly, Ganga
      Bai (PW1) who were to corroborate PW4 on
      that aspect was declared hostile. Even, if we
      assume that the testimony of those two
      witnesses would not damage the testimony of
      PW4 as they may have their own reasons for
      not supporting the prosecution case yet,
      when        we      peruse         the      detailed   reasons
      recorded by the High Court in its judgment
      (i.e. paragraphs 31 to 35 thereof) to hold that
      the testimony of PW4 is not of a stellar
      quality as to merit conviction solely on its
      basis, we find no such perversity in the High
      Court’s conclusion as may warrant a reversal
      of acquittal into a conviction in exercise of
      jurisdiction          under
Article     136
of    the
      Constitution.
The argument that doctrine falsus in uno,
      falsus in omnibus is not applicable in India
      hence PW4’s testimony, even if not acceptable
      on certain aspects, could be relied to prove
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019              Page 33 of 36
other       circumstances,              is    not        acceptable
      because the High Court, on basis of analysis
      of the entire evidence, has discarded the
      witness as not reliable while observing:
“that    her    statement     is    full    of
           embellishments, exaggerations and material
           discrepancies and, therefore, we find
           ourselves unable to pick out the grain of
           truth from the falsehood of her statement.’’


           Further,         even        if    we        accept     PW4’s
      testimony that the accused, on that fateful
      day, took the deceased on a bicycle to the
      fields that by itself is not conclusive to
      indicate that he took her to kill her; because,
      admittedly, the accused held agricultural
      holding and it is quite possible that he may
      have taken his wife to assist him in the
      agricultural           operations.           It     is     common
      practice in villages for ladies to help their
      menfolk         in     agricultural          operations.        The
      allegation that while taking her a declaration
      was made that she would be killed does not
      inspire our confidence for the reason that the
      motive set out by the prosecution for such a
      quarrel has not been proved. Otherwise also,
      quarrels and disputes between husband and
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                  Page 34 of 36
wife are every day phenomena and not such
      an event which may create a strong suspicion
      of an impending crime much less murder.
      More so, where, as in the present case,
      marriage          is    subsisting          since   long   with
      children out of the wedlock.                    Further, this
      circumstance by itself is not so clinching as
      to conclusively point towards the guilt of the
      appellant by ruling out possibility of a third-
      party hand in the murder. In this regard, it
      be noticed that, as per the prosecution case,
      the deceased was found injured at around
      2000 hours in an open area at some distance
      from the hut of the accused. At what time
      the accused had taken the deceased on his
      bicycle is not clear from the testimony of PW4
      though, from the first part of her testimony,
      it appears that the accused and the deceased
      were noticed quarrelling with each other at
      about 1630 hours and soon thereafter, the
      appellant took the deceased on his cycle. If,
      from that, we put the event of taking the
      deceased on bicycle at about 1630 hours
      there is still quite a large time-gap between
      1630 hours and 2000 hours for other
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019             Page 35 of 36
intervening          factors        to      operate.     In    light
      thereof,        considering           that     the      place      of
      occurrence was an open place and the other
      circumstances               (i.e.        motive,       disclosure,
      recovery and extra judicial confession) were
      not proved beyond reasonable doubt, shifting
      the burden on the accused to explain the
      circumstances              in       which       the     deceased
      sustained injuries, or to demonstrate that he
      parted company of the deceased, would not
      be justified in the facts of the case.
25.        For all the reasons above, if the High Court
has extended the benefit of doubt to the accused, its
view being a plausible view, in our opinion, does not
call for any interference.
26.        The appeals are, therefore, dismissed.
....................................J.
                                            (Sanjay Kishan Kaul)

                                            ....................................J.
                                            (Manoj Misra)

                                            ....................................J.
                                            (Aravind Kumar)

New Delhi;
April 28, 2023
Crl. Appeals @ SLP (Crl.) Nos.8047-8048 of 2019                 Page 36 of 36