[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
In Re Problems And Miseries Of Migrant ... vs Unknown on 20 April, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
NON-REPORTABLE
                               IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                    CIVIL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION
                                         M.A. NO. 94 OF 2022
                                                    IN
                                       SMW(C) NO. 6 OF 2020


                         In Re Problems and Miseries of Migrant
                         Labourers                   ...Petitioner(s)

                                                Versus


                                              ORDER
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    A further status report has been filed on

                               behalf of the Union of India. In the status

                               report, it is stated that against the total target

                               of    38,37,42,394    migrants     28,86,23,993

                               migrants have already registered their names
Signature Not Verified         on eShram portal. It is stated that e-Shram
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.04.20
16:17:34 IST
Reason:
Page 1 of 8
portal was launched on 26th August, 2021 by

the Ministry of Labour & Employment in

technical      cooperation    with   NIC.      It    is

submitted that eShram portal is meant to

register          and          support              the

unorganised/migrant workers by providing

them with a Universal Account Number

(UAN). It is submitted that the Ministry has

on boarded CSC-SPV to function as eShram

registration center to provide assistance in

registration to the unorganized workers. That

the registration charges of Rs. 20/- per

registration is being directly paid to the CSC-

SPV by the Central Government and so far,

payment of more than Rs. 347.57 crores upto

December, 2022 has been made to CSC for

registration      on     eShram.     The       steps

undertaken       by     the   CSC    to     facilitate
Page 2 of 8
registration of unorganized workers on the

eShram portal has been stated in the further

status   report.       It     is   submitted     that     the

Ministry of Labour and Employment has

developed a Standard Operating Procedure

(SOP) to share eShram portal data with States

and Union Territories (UTs). Accordingly,

guidelines for data sharing have been shared

with all the States & UTs in accordance with

the SOP. It is submitted that Data Sharing

Portal (DSP) has been developed and made

live   by   the        Ministry          of   Labour      and

Employment        to        facilitate    the   sharing    of

eShram data with the State Governments so

as to equip them for targeted implementation

of the welfare schemes. It is submitted that

24 States/UTs have onboarded Data Sharing

Portal through which they can access eShram
Page 3 of 8
data of their State/UT. It is submitted that

     the concerned State/UT government will have

     to share the data with other departments of

     the State Government as per the requirement.
2.   It is further submitted in the report that it

     has been found that out of 28.60 crores

     registrants on eShram, 20.63 crores are also

     registered on Ration Card Data. It is pointed

     that    approximately   3.82   crores     eShram

     registrants are also found to be beneficiary

     under    PM-Kisan    Samman      Nidhi.    It   is

     submitted that the benefit of Pradhan Mantri

     Shram Yogi Mann-Dhan Yojana (PM-SYM)

     has been given to the eligible migrants.
3.   Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG appearing

     on behalf of the Union of India has submitted

     that each State has their own policies for
Page 4 of 8
issuance of the ration card. It is submitted

     that the concerned State/UT has to take

     further   steps   to   issue   ration   card   to

     remaining registrants on eShram.
4.   Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel has

     pointed out that approximately more than 10

     crores persons are deprived of the benefit of
National Food Security Act
due to non-

     issuance of the ration cards which as such is

     due to the fact that at present census of 2011

     is being implemented and that after 2011

     population has increased.
5.   Having heard Ms. Bhati, learned ASG and

     Shri Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel and

     on going through the further status report,

     we appreciate the exercise undertaken by the

     UOI with the assistance of the respective
Page 5 of 8
States/UTs     for    registration    of    the

migrants/unorganized workers on eShram

portal. 28.60 crores migrants/unorganized

workers are registered on eShram portal

which is a commendable job. However, out of

28.60 registrants on eShram 20.63 crores are

registered on ration card data. Meaning

thereby, the rest registrants on eShram are

still without ration cards. Without the ration

card a migrant/unorganized labourer or his

family members may be deprived of the

benefit of the schemes and may be the benefit

under   the
National   Food   Security   Act
.

Therefore, being a welfare State, it is the duty

of the concerned State/UT to see that the

remaining registrants on eShram, who are

still not registered on ration card data and

who are not issued the ration cards, they are
Page 6 of 8
issued ration cards and the exercise for

     issuance of ration cards is required to be

     expediated. As the Union of India and the

     concerned State/UT now already have the

     data of the registrants on eShram portal and

     will be having the required information, the

     State/UT shall reach to them so that they can

     be issued the ration cards and that their

     names are registered on ration card data.
6.   At present, we give further three months’ time

     to the concerned State/UT to undertake the

     exercise to issue ration cards to the left out

     registrants on eShram portal by giving wide

     publicity and the concerned State/UT to

     approach them through the office of the

     concerned Collector of the District so that

     more and more registrants on eShram portal
Page 7 of 8
are issued the ration cards and so that they

     may get the benefit of the benevolent schemes

     floated by the UOI and the State Government

     including the benefit under the
National Food

     Security Act
. We order accordingly.


         Put up on 03.10.2023, so as to enable the

     Union of India to file further status report.
………………………………….J.
                               [M.R. SHAH]




                        ………………………………….J.
                       [AHSANUDDIN AMANULLAH]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 20, 2023
Page 8 of 8