[Cites
12
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd vs Adani Power (Mundra) Limited on 20 April, 2023
Author:
B.R. Gavai
Bench:
B.R. Gavai
,
Vikram Nath
,
Sanjay Karol
REPORTABLE
                                      IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                       CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO.4143 OF 2020

                         UTTAR HARYANA BIJLI VITRAN
                         NIGAM LTD. & ANR.                            ...APPELLANT (S)

                                              VERSUS
                         ADANI POWER (MUNDRA) LIMITED
                         & ORS.                                      ...RESPONDENT (S)

                                                 JUDGMENT
B.R. GAVAI, J.
1.   The appellants challenge the judgment and order passed

                         by the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity, New Delhi (hereinafter

                         referred to as “APTEL”) dated 3rd November 2020, thereby

                         dismissing the appeal filed by them and maintaining the

                         judgment and order dated 31 st May 2018 passed by the Central

                         Electricity Regulatory Commission (“CERC” for short) in Petition

                         No. 97/MP/2017.
Signature Not Verified
2.   The facts, in brief, giving rise to the present appeal are as
Digitally signed by
Narendra Prasad
Date: 2023.04.20
11:59:44 IST
Reason:                  under:
1
3.   Uttar Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. and Dakshin

Haryana Bijli Vitran Nigam Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as

“Haryana   Utilities”/“Appellants”)   are   distribution   licensees

undertaking the distribution and retail supply of electricity to

consumers in the State of Haryana.          Haryana Utilities had

entered into two Power Purchase Agreements (“PPAs” for short)

on 7th August 2008 with Adani Power Mundra Limited

(hereinafter   referred to as “AP(M)L”) for       procurement of

contracted capacity of 1424 MW from generating units 7, 8 and

9 established by AP(M)L at Mundra in the State of Gujarat.
4.   The PPAs were entered into pursuant to a tariff based

Competitive Bidding Process initiated by the Haryana Utilities

under the provisions of
Section 63
of the Electricity Act, 2003,

as per the Standard Bidding Guidelines notified by the Central

Government.
5.   AP(M)L had filed Petition No. 155/MP/2012 on 5 th July

2012 before the CERC seeking, inter alia, relief of increase in

tariff on various grounds.   One of the grounds was that the

Indonesian Regulations, promulgated by the Government of
2
Indonesia, providing for the application of benchmark price for

export of coal from Indonesia resulted in higher price of coal

resulting in higher cost of generation of power.
6.   AP(M)L had also claimed Force Majeure Event within the

scope of
Article 12
and Change in Law within the scope of
Article 13
of the PPAs.
7.   The orders dated 2nd April 2013 and 21st February 2014

passed by the CERC in the said Petition No.155/MP/2012 were

challenged before the learned APTEL by way of a batch of

appeals, the lead being Appeal No. 100 of 2013.        The order

dated 7th April 2016 passed by the learned APTEL in Appeal No.

100 of 2013 and the batch of appeals were challenged before

this Court in the case of
Energy Watchdog v. Central

Electricity Regulatory Commission
and others1.       This Court

disposed of the said appeals on 11 th April 2017 in terms of the

following directions:
“57. Both the letter dated 31-7-2013 and
           the revised Tariff Policy are statutory
           documents being issued under
Section 3
of
           the Act and have the force of law. This

1     (2017) 14 SCC 80
3
being so, it is clear that so far as the
procurement of Indian coal is concerned,
to the extent that the supply from Coal
India and other Indian sources is cut
down, the PPA read with these documents
provides in Clause 13.2 that while
determining the consequences of change in
law, parties shall have due regard to the
principle that the purpose of compensating
the party affected by such change in law is
to    restore,   through   monthly    tariff
payments, the affected party to the
economic position as if such change in law
has not occurred. Further, for the
operation period of the PPA, compensation
for any increase/decrease in cost to the
seller shall be determined and be effective
from such date as decided by the Central
Electricity Regulation Commission. This
being the case, we are of the view that
though change in Indonesian law would
not qualify as a change in law under the
guidelines read with the PPA, change in
Indian law certainly would.
58. ……….The          Central    Electricity
Regulatory Commission will, as a result of
this judgment, go into the matter afresh
and determine what relief should be
granted to those power generators who fall
within Clause 13 of the PPA as has been
held by us in this judgment.”
4
8.   It may be mentioned that this Court, in the case of
Energy

Watchdog
(supra), specifically rejected the claim that the

increase in price of coal due to change in Indonesian

Regulations would also amount to Change in Law. This Court

held that only Change in Law in India would entitle the

Generator to the benefit of restitution on account of such

Change in Law.
9.   Pursuant to the orders passed by this Court in the case of
Energy     Watchdog
(supra),    AP(M)L     filed   Petition

No.97/MP/2017 before the CERC. The CERC, vide order dated

31st May, 2018, allowed the Petition and directed the working

out of the relief based on the formulation given in Paragraph 46

of its judgment for the period from 1 st April 2013 to 31st March

2017. Subsequently, a Review Petition bearing No.24/RP/2018

also came to be filed. The same was rejected by the CERC vide

order dated 3rd December 2018. Being aggrieved thereby, the

appellants preferred appeal before the learned APTEL.
10. The learned APTEL framed the following four issues for

consideration:
5
“Issue No.1:-
Whether       the       Central
                Commission was justified in
                holding that Adani Power's bid
                was    based     entirely   on
                domestic coal availability and
                hence entitled to Change in
                Law relief on account of
                domestic coal shortfall?
Issue No.2:-
Whether shortfall in domestic
                coal was due to Change in
                Law and compensation should
                be limited to the difference
                between 100% of ACQ and
                65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of
                ACQ as specified in NCDP
                2013?
Issue No.3:-
Whether the start date of
                Change in Law compensation
                allowed    by   the   Central
                Commission     amounts     to
                retrospective  operation   of
                Ministry of Power's letter
                dated 31.07.2013?
Issue No.4:-
Whether       the      Central
                Commission erred in ignoring
                the      methodology       for
                computation of Change in Law
                compensation
laid down in
its
                earlier Order in Petition No.
                79/MP/2013        -      GMR
                Kamalanga Energy Ltd. & Anr.
6
vs. DHBVNL      &Ors.   ("GMR
                           Case")?
11.   After hearing the learned counsel for the parties, the

learned APTEL held all the issues in favour of the respondent

No.1-Generator and dismissed the appeal. Being aggrieved

thereby, the appellants have filed the present appeal.
12. We have heard Shri M.G. Ramachandran, learned Senior

Counsel appearing on behalf of the appellants and Dr. A.M.

Singhvi, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the

respondent No.1- AP(M)L.
13. Shri Ramachandran submits that the CERC as well as the

learned APTEL have grossly erred in granting Change in Law

relief for the shortfall in the availability of 100% coal.   He

submits that AP(M)L’s bid and the PPA were admittedly

premised both on domestic coal and imported coal in the ratio

of 70:30. As such, the relief could be granted only insofar as

the shortfall in the 70% domestic coal is concerned.         He

submits that AP(M)L has submitted the bid on the premise that

30% of the coal would be imported, while 70% of the coal would
7
be procured indigenously.     He submits that the effect of the

orders passed by the CERC and the learned APTEL is that

AP(M)L has been granted benefit on the consideration that its

bid was premised on 100% domestic coal.
14. Shri Ramachandran further submits that a perusal of the

various pleadings of AP(M)L would clearly reveal that AP(M)L’s

bid was premised on domestic and imported coal in the

proportion of 70:30. However, all these documents have been

ignored by the learned APTEL.       Shri Ramachandran submits

that the documents placed on record would reveal that AP(M)L

had represented that it will use imported coal for generation of

power.   He submits that the Executive Summary of the bid

submitted by AP(M)L would reveal that AP(M)L had represented

therein that the strategic advantage of the Power Plant was its

proximity to Mundra Port, where coal is being imported.
Learned counsel submits that in view of the pleadings of

AP(M)L, it was clear that it was its responsibility to procure 30%

imported coal. He, therefore, submits that granting of relief for

shortfall of 30% imported coal is nothing else but a perversity.
8
15. Shri Ramachandran further submits that the methodology

of computation of compensation on account of the Change in

Law event has also been erroneously applied by the CERC and

affirmed by the learned APTEL.               He submits that the

methodology that ought to have been applied was the difference

between landed cost of alternate coal on the one part and the

prevalent landed cost of domestic coal or quoted energy

charges, whichever was higher, on the other part. He submits

that had there been no Change in Law and AP(M)L had received

the entire quantum of domestic coal, it would have had to bear

the prevalent price of landed domestic coal on its own,

irrespective of whether such cost is below or above the quoted

energy charges in the bid. He submits that if such landed cost

of domestic coal is higher than the quoted energy charges,

AP(M)L was not entitled to claim the difference between the

landed cost of domestic coal and the quoted energy charges.
16. Shri Ramachandran further submits that the learned

APTEL is wrong in proceeding on the basis that there was no

objection   by   the   appellants   before    the   CERC   on   the
9
methodology for computation of Change in Law compensation

laid down in its order in Petition No. 79/MP/2013-GMR

Kamalanga     Energy    Ltd.   & Anr.        v.   DHBVNL   & Ors.

(hereinafter referred to as “GMR Case”)
17. Shri Ramachandran further submitted that the appellants

have no objection for giving benefit on account of Change in

Law for shortfall in 70% of coal to be procured indigenously.
18. Dr. A.M. Singhvi, on the contrary, submits that the bid

submitted by AP(M)L was on the basis of National Coal

Distribution Policy, 2007 (for short, “NCDP 2007”). He submits

that there was no bifurcation in the bid with regard to 70%

domestic coal and 30% imported coal. Learned Senior Counsel

submits that the cut-off date for Change in Law claim would be

17th November 2007, i.e. minus 7 days from the last date for

submission of the bid, i.e. 24th November 2007. It is submitted

that even in the PPAs signed with Haryana Utilities on 7 th

August 2008, there is no bifurcation of domestic and imported

coal. He submits that though the Standing Linkage Committee

(Long-Term)   (hereinafter   referred   to   as   “SLC   (LT)”)   has
10
considered AP(M)L’s application for 100% coal of its total

capacity, it has granted linkage only for 70% of 1980 MW, i.e.

1386 MW only. He submitted that linkage of balance 30% was

deferred to the future.
19. Dr. Singhvi further submitted that the SLC (LT) is a

statutory body and its decision would amount to Change in

Law.
In this respect, he relies on the judgment of this Court in

the case of
Ashoka Smokeless Coal India (P) Ltd. and others

v. Union of India
and others2
20. When we heard this batch of Electricity appeals, it was

agreed between all the parties that this Court should first

decide Civil Appeal No. 684 of 2021 (
Maharashtra State

Electricity Distribution Company Limited v. Adani Power

Maharashtra Limited and Others3
) [
“MSEDCL v. APML and

Others”
, for short] and Civil Appeal No. 6927 of 2021

(
Maharashtra     State    Electricity   Distribution   Company

Limited v. GMR Warora Energy Ltd. and Others
) inasmuch

as three of the issues involved in all the appeals in the batch
2     (2007) 2 SCC 640

3     2023 SCC OnLine SC 233
11
were common. It was submitted that those two appeals could

be decided by deciding the three common issues.         However,

insofar as the other appeals are concerned, it was submitted

that, in addition to the three common issues, certain additional

issues were also involved and it was agreed that after those two

appeals are decided, the other appeals should be heard for

considering these additional issues.
21. The said three common issues are thus:
(i)    Whether ‘Change in Law’ relief on account of NCDP

            2013 should be on ‘actuals’ viz. as against 100% of

            normative coal requirement assured in terms of

            NCDP 2007 OR restricted to trigger levels in NCDP

            2013 viz. 65%, 65%, 67% and 75% of Assured Coal

            Quantity (ACQ)?
(ii)   Whether for computing ‘Change in Law’ relief, the

            operating parameters be considered on ‘actuals’ OR

            as per technical information submitted in bid?
12
(iii)   Whether ‘Change in Law’ relief compensation is to be

             granted from 1st April 2013 (start of Financial Year) or

             31st July 2013 (date of NCDP 2013)?
22. After extensively hearing all the learned counsel for the

parties, vide the judgment and order dated 3rd March 2023 in

the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), this Court

decided those two appeals after considering the aforesaid three

issues.
23. The first issue was answered by this Court, holding that

the ‘Change in Law’ relief for domestic coal shortfall should be

on ‘actuals’ i.e. as against 100% of normative coal requirement

assured in terms of NCDP, 2007. Insofar as the second issue is

concerned, it was held that the Station Heat Rate (“SHR” for

short) and Auxiliary consumption should be considered as per

the Regulations or actuals, whichever is lower. The third issue

was answered holding that the Start date for the ‘Change in

Law’ event for the NCDP, 2013 is 1st April 2013.
13
24. As such, Issue Nos. 2 and 3, which were framed by the

learned APTEL in the impugned judgment and order dated 3 rd

November 2020 stand fully covered by the judgment of this

Court in the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra). The

remaining two issues that are required to be considered in the

present appeal are thus:
“Issue No.1:-      Whether       the       Central
        [as framed by      Commission was justified in
        the learned        holding that Adani Power's bid
        APTEL]             was    based     entirely   on
                           domestic coal availability and
                           hence entitled to Change in
                           Law relief on account of
                           domestic coal shortfall?

        Issue No.4:-
        [as framed by      Whether       the      Central
        the learned        Commission erred in ignoring
        APTEL]             the      methodology       for
                           computation of Change in Law
                           compensation
laid down in
its
                           earlier Order in Petition No.
                           79/MP/2013        -      GMR
                           Kamalanga Energy Ltd. & Anr.
                           vs. DHBVNL &Ors. ("GMR
                           Case")?
14
25. Before we proceed to consider the aforesaid two issues, we

may note that the present appeal arises out of the concurrent

orders passed by the CERC and the learned APTEL.
26. This Court, in the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), after considering the relevant provisions under the
Electricity Act, 2003
with regard to constitution of various

expert bodies like the CEA, CERC and the learned APTEL, held

that these bodies are bodies consisting of experts in the field.

After considering various judgments on the issue, this Court

observed thus:
“123. Recently, the Constitution Bench of
          this Court in the case of
Vivek Narayan
          Sharma v. Union of India
has held that
          the Courts should be slow in interfering
          with the decisions taken by the experts in
          the field and unless it is found that the
          expert bodies have failed to take into
          consideration the mandatory statutory
          provisions or the decisions taken are
          based on extraneous considerations or
          they are ex facie arbitrary and illegal, it
          will not be appropriate for this Court to
          substitute its views with that of the
          expert bodies.”
15
27. Though the present appeal arises out of the concurrent

orders passed by CERC as well as APTEL, in view of the

submissions made, we will proceed to consider the rival

submissions.
28. Insofar as the first issue with regard to the bifurcation of

70% domestic and 30% imported coal is concerned, we have

examined the documents placed on record by the parties.
29. None of the documents placed on record would reveal that

a representation was given by AP(M)L that its bid is based on

70% domestic and 30% imported coal. Insofar as the document

on which Shri Ramachandran has relied i.e. the Executive

Summary of the bid is concerned, the same reads thus:
“Adani Enterprises Ltd., the promoter of
          APL, is the largest coal importing
          company of the country. The strategic
          advantage of the Power Plant is its
          proximity to MUNDRA PORT, where coal
          is being imported. Mundra Port possesses
          World Class Coal handling facilities with
          17 meter deep draft permitting capsize
          vessels to berth alongside.”
30. It could thus be seen that what has been stated in the

Executive Summary by AP(M)L is that its Power Plant had a
16
strategic advantage inasmuch as it had proximity to Mundra

Port. It further states that Mundra Port possesses World Class

Coal handling facilities with 17 meter deep draft permitting

capsize vessels to berth alongside. By the said document, it has

proposed to supply 1425 MW to Haryana Power Generation

Corporation Limited (HPGCL) from 1980 MW (3 x 660 MW)

Phase IV extension of Mundra Project. The representation given

is that it will use either imported or indigenous coal.
31. If the argument of the appellants is to be accepted that at

the time of bid there was no assurance of domestic coal supply,

then the contention of the appellants that AP(M)L is entitled to

shortfall of 70% of the coal itself is contradictory.
32. In any case, even on facts, it is to be noted that the

contention is without substance. AP(M)L has offered to supply

1425 MW of power from its Phase IV extension of Mundra

Project, having a capacity of 1980 MW. The PPA entered into

between Haryana Utilities and AP(M)L is for 1424 MW.
33. The SLC(LT), in its meeting dated 12th November 2008,

based on the recommendation of the Central Electricity
17
Authority (“CEA” for short), Ministry of Power (“MoP” for short)

had authorized the issuance of LoA for 1386 MW i.e. 70% of

1980 MW installed capacity of Phase IV extension of the

Mundra Project.      This was done in accordance with the

provisions of the NCDP 2007. Insofar as the remaining capacity

is concerned, the decision was deferred to be taken by the SLC

(LT) in the future, based on the recommendation of MoP and

other relevant factors.
34. It could thus be seen that AP(M)L would be entitled to

benefit on account of the Change in Law if there was any

shortfall of 70% of the domestic coal as was decided to be

allotted by the SLC (LT) in its meeting dated 12 th November

2008, culminating in the Ministry of Coal (for short, “MoC”)

issuing a LoA dated 25th June 2009 and the Fuel Supply

Agreement (for short, “FSA”) being signed by AP(M)L with CIL on

9th June 2012.
35. Undisputedly, the claim of AP(M)L is with regard to

shortfall in the assured quantity of 70%, and not above that.
18
36. From the order passed by the learned APTEL, it is clear

that it has been the consistent stand of the appellants that

AP(M)L was in a position to generate and supply contracted

capacity of 1424 MW out of the fuel linkage arising out of the

FSA dated 9th June 2012 with Mahanadi Coal Field Limited

(“MCL” for short). It has been its stand that AP(M)L should use

the entire domestic coal availability towards the contracted

capacity of the appellants first, and then use the imported coal

for the deficit to reach the targeted PLF. It has further been its

stand that the entire domestic coal available should be

accounted towards 1424 MW contracted to Haryana Utilities.
37. In its reply dated 31st July 2017, Haryana Utilities have

categorically stated thus:
“Thus the actual coal received from MCL
          is required to be considered towards
          power supplied under Haryana PPAs for
          the purpose of relief under force
          majeure."
38. In its I.A. No.12 of 2018 dated 4 th March 2018 in Petition

No.97/MP/2017, the Haryana Utilities have reiterated thus:
19
“It is submitted that the entire quantum
          of domestic coal available from MCL under
          the FSA dated 9.6.2012 was to be
          exclusively used for generation and supply
          of electricity to the Haryana Utilities
          under the PPA dated 7.8.2008.
39. It is further to be noted that the learned APTEL had,

during the course of the hearing, put a pertinent query to the

learned counsel appearing for Haryana Utilities, as to whether

the entire actual coal received from MCL was used towards the

power supplied under the Haryana PPAs. To this query, it was

replied thus:
“During the hearing, Mr. Ramachandran
          admitted that Adani Power has been
          using entire actual coal received from
          MCL towards the power supplied under
          the Haryana PPAs”
40. In view of this factual position that the entire domestic

coal linkage came to be utilized for supplying power to Haryana

Utilities, it is unjust, in our opinion, on the part of Haryana

Utilities to say that 70% of the installed capacity should be

further bifurcated and the Change in Law benefit should be

restricted only to 70% of the 70% of the installed capacity which

was allotted by the SLC (LT).
20
41. Even according to Haryana Utilities, the entire coal

covered under FSA was required to be utilized for generating

power to be supplied to it as per the Memorandum of

Understanding (“MoU” for short). Therefore, denial of the benefit

of shortfall of the coal assured under FSA, in our view, would be

contrary to the restitutionary principle, as held by this Court in

the cases of
Energy Watchdog
(supra) and
Jaipur Vidyut

Vitaran Nigam Ltd. and others v. Adani Power Rajasthan

Limited
and another4.
42. In any case, the learned APTEL has clarified that AP(M)L

was neither claiming nor was entitled to claim any Change in

Law compensation beyond the one which was covered by

linkage coal, i.e. 1386 MW.
43. The other limb of argument in this regard is that AP(M)L

had MoUs with foreign companies for import of coal.
44. To a specific query by the learned APTEL, it was fairly

conceded by the learned counsel for Haryana Utilities that the

MoUs were general in nature and not specific for Phase IV


4    2020 SCC Online SC 697
21
Mundra Power Plant. As such, the finding of the learned APTEL

that the MoUs annexed with the bid were only to show its

competence to participate in the bid, and that it cannot be

stretched to hold that the bidder was to procure imported coal

to the extent of 30% for the project, cannot be said to be

perverse.
45.
In the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), this

Court has elaborately referred to the earlier judgments of this

Court and observed thus:
“132. Undisputedly,    in the     case
            of
Energy Watchdog
(supra) as well as
            in
Adani Rajasthan
case (supra) this
            Court has held that on account of the
            Change in Law, the generating companies
            were entitled to compensation so as to
            restore the party to the same economic
            position as if such Change in Law had
            not occurred. Had the Change in Law not
            occurred, the generating companies
            would have been entitled to the supply as
            assured by the CIL/Coal Companies
            under the FSA.”
46. We are, therefore, of the considered view that no error

could be found with the concurrent findings that AP(M)L was

entitled to Change in Law relief for 100% of the contracted
22
capacity i.e. 1386 MW, which is 70% of the installed capacity of

1980 MW of the Phase IV extension of Mundra Project. In other

words, the finding of the CERC and the learned APTEL is to the

effect that AP(M)L would not be entitled to any benefit of Change

in Law beyond 70% of the installed capacity i.e. 1386 MW. The

said findings cannot be said to not be based on the material on

record, or based on extraneous considerations.
47. We are now left with the second issue with regard to

methodology.
48. The grievance of Haryana Utilities is that the methodology

for granting benefit on account of the Change in Law adopted

by the CERC and affirmed by the learned APTEL is contrary to

the one which was previously arrived at in the earlier cases of

GMR, DB Power etc.
49. Perusal of the order passed by the learned APTEL would

reveal that AP(M)L had proposed a methodology based on the

methodology approved by the CERC in the GMR Kamalanga

Energy Limited and Another v. Dakshin Haryana Bijli
23
Vitran Nigam Limited and Others5 considering the quoted

tariff under the PPAs as the base.
50. The learned APTEL had referred to the Record of

Proceedings of the CERC dated 10th August, 2017, which read

thus:
“3. In response to the Commission’s
             query as to whether the methodology
             adopted by the Petitioner in the light of
             the methodology given in GMR case is
             acceptable to the Haryana Utilities,
             learned counsel replied in the positive.”
51. The learned APTEL had also referred to the order of the

CERC dated 28th September 2017 in I.A. No.57 of 2017 in

Petition No.97/MP/2017, which reads thus:
“7…… Haryana Utilities who is the only
             respondent has not objected to the
             calculation made by the Applicant.”
52. The learned APTEL had also referred to the order dated 3 rd

December 2018 passed by the CERC in Review Petition bearing

No.24/RP/2018, which reads thus:
"25... It is apparent from the above that
             the Commission, after due consideration
             of the submissions of the Adani Power
5       Petition No. 79/MP/2013 dated 03.02.2016
24
and Prayas had consciously decided on
          the methodology for computation of relief
          due to shortage of domestic coal under
          change in law for the period from
          1.4.2013 to 31.3.2017 in Para 46 of the
          impugned order. The Review Petitioners
          had not suggested any methodology of
          calculation of the relief due to shortage of
          domestic coal. On the other hand, the
          Review Petitioners in their reply dated
          28.7.2017      in    the     Petition   No.
          97/MP/2017 had stated that "the
          reliance to the decision of GMR is wholly
          in appropriate". The Review Petitioners
          are now suggesting an alternative
          formula for computation of the relief
          under change in law. As already
          reiterated in the earlier part of the order,
          the    review    cannot     be    used   for
          substitution of a view already taken with
          a new view. Therefore, the review on the
          ground is not maintainable."
53. We    find   that   Haryana      Utilities   are   indulging   into

approbation and reprobation. They cannot be permitted to blow

hot and cold at the same time. After accepting before the CERC

that they would adopt the methodology as given in the case of

GMR Kamalanga Energy Limited (supra), it would not be

appropriate, in our view, on the part of the appellants, which

are, after all, instrumentalities of the State, to change its stand

after final orders are passed by the CERC.
25
54.
In the case of
MSEDCL v. APML and Others
(supra), this

Court observed thus:
“150. In spite of this legal position and
          the stand taken by the Union of India,
          the DISCOMS are taking a stand which is
          contrary to the stand of the Union of
          India.
In
Energy Watchdog
(supra), it was
          also sought to be urged by DISCOMS that
          even on account of Change in Law,
          adjustments would not be permissible,
          which contention was outrightly rejected.
          We have come across a number of
          matters wherein concurrent orders
          passed by the Regulatory Body and the
          Appellate Forum are assailed. Such a
          litigation would, in fact, efface the
          purpose of the
Electricity Act
. As already
          discussed herein above, one of the major
          reasons      for   the    enactment     of
          the
Electricity Act
was the deterioration
          in performance of the State Electricity
          Boards.”
55. In the present case also, we find that the concurrent

findings of fact recorded by the two expert bodies could have

been interfered with only if they failed to take into consideration

the mandatory statutory provisions or if the decisions had been

taken by them on extraneous considerations or that they were
26
ex facie arbitrary and illegal. Nothing of that sort can be found

in the impugned judgment and order to warrant interference.
56. The appeal is, therefore, found to be without substance

and the same is accordingly dismissed. No costs.
…….........................J.
                                                  [B.R. GAVAI]



                                         …….........................J.
                                               [VIKRAM NATH]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 20, 2023
27