[Cites
70
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Commissioner Of Income Tax Jaipur vs Prakash Chand Lunia (D) Thr Lrs on 24 April, 2023
Author:
M. R. Shah
Bench:
M.R. Shah
,
C.T. Ravikumar
REPORTABLE
                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CIVIL APPEAL NOS.7689-90 OF 2022



                         The Commissioner of Income Tax Jaipur ..Appellant



                                                         Versus


                         Prakash Chand Lunia (D)
                         Thr.Lrs. & Anr.                                    ..Respondents


                                                   JUDGMENT
M. R. Shah, J.
1.     Feeling     aggrieved        and   dissatisfied    with     the
                                impugned judgment and order dated 22.11.2016
                                passed by the High Court of Judicature for
Signature Not Verified
Rajasthan at Jaipur passed in DBITA No.96/2003
Digitally signed by
RASHMI DHYANI
Date: 2023.04.24
18:06:28 IST
Reason:                         and DBITR No.6/1996 by which the High Court
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 1 of 92
has allowed the said appeals, the Revenue has
       preferred the present appeals.
2.     The facts leading to the present appeals in
       nutshell are as under:
2.1    A search was conducted by the Directorate of
       Revenue Intelligence (DRI) officers at the premises
       situated at A-11, 12, Sector - VII, NOIDA taken on
       rent by the assessee, Shri Prakash Chand Lunia.
The DRI recovered 144 slabs of silver from the
       premises and two silver ingots from the business
       premises of the assessee at 1397, Chandni
       Chowk, Delhi. The assessee was arrested under
Section 104
of the Customs Act for committing
       offence punishable under
Section 135
of the
       Customs Act. The Collector, Customs held that
       the assessee Shri Prakash Chand Lunia is the
       owner      of   silver/bullion     and       the    transaction
       thereof     was     not      recorded   in    the    books         of
       accounts. The Collector of Customs, New Delhi
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 2 of 92
ordered confiscation of the said 146 slabs of silver
       weighing 4641.962 Kilograms valued at Rs.3.06
       Crores. The Collector Customs further imposed a
       personal penalty of Rs.25 Lakhs on Sh. Prakash
       Chand Lunia under
Section 112
of the Customs
       Act. The Collector held that the silver under
       reference was of smuggled nature.
2.2    During the course of the assessment proceedings
       the Assessing Officer observed that the assessee
       was not able to explain the nature and source of
       acquisition of silver of which he is held to be the
       owner,      therefore        the   deeming    provisions           of
Section     69A
of       the   Income    Tax    Act,    1961
       (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Act, 1961) would be
       applicable. The investment in this regard was not
       found recorded in the books of accounts of the
       assessee that were produced before the then
       Assessing       Officer.      Accordingly,    the    Assessing
       Officer passed an assessment Order and made an
       addition of Rs.3,06,36,909/- under
Section 69A
of
       the Act, 1961. In appeals preferred by the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 3 of 92
Assessee against the assessment order, the CIT(A)
       dismissed the appeal of the assessee.                 Feeling
       aggrieved the assessee preferred the appeal before
       the ITAT. The ITAT, Jaipur also upheld the order
       of the CIT(A) so far as Section 69A is concerned,
       however,       partly        allowed   the   appeal   of   the
       assessee. As regards some other minor additions,
       the ITAT set aside some minor other additions
       and remanded the matter to the AO for fresh
       examination. The AO re-examined the issue and
       addition was made.             The CIT(A) also upheld the
       order of the AO.              The Assessee preferred the
       appeal against the fresh order passed by the
       CIT(A) before the ITAT. The ITAT, in the second
       round as well upheld the order of the authorities
       below. A reference was made by the ITAT to the
       High Court with the following questions of law:
(i)    “Whether on the facts and in the circumstances
              of the case, the Tribunal after construing and
              interpreting the provisions contained in
section
              69A
of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was right in
              law, in holding that the assessee was the owner
              of the 144 silver bars found at premises no A 11
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 4 of 92
& 12 , Sector - VII, Noida and two silver bars
              found at premises of M/s Lunia & Co Delhi and
              in sustaining addition of Rs.3,06,36,909/- being
              unexplained investment in the hands of the
              assessee under
Section 69A
of the Act?
(ii)   If the answer to the above question is in
              affirmative then, whether, on the facts and in
              the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was
              right in law in distinguishing the ratio laid down
              by their Lordships of the Supreme Court in the
              case of
Piara Singh v/s CIT
, 124 ITR 41 and
              thereby not allowing the loss on account of
              confiscation of silver bars?"
2.3    While the reference was pending before the High
       Court, penalty proceedings were initiated against
       the assessee. An order under
Section 271 (i) (c)
of
       the Act came to be confirmed by both the CIT (A)
       and the ITAT. Accordingly, the assessee filed an
       appeal under
Section 260A
of the Act against the
       Penalty order, before the High Court. The High
       Court while deciding both the cases together, qua
       the first question, decided in favour of the
       Revenue and the rental premises of the assessee,
       the same is to be added to his income as a
       natural consequence. However, with regard to the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                  Page 5 of 92
second question, the High Court held that loss of
       confiscation by the DRI official of Customs
       Department is business loss.    While holding the
       High Court has relied upon the decision of this
       Court in the case of
CIT, Patiala vs. Piara Singh
reported in 124 ITR 41.            The impugned
       judgment and order passed by the High Court is
       the subject matter of the present appeal.
3.     Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG has appeared on
       behalf of the Revenue and Shri Arijit Prasad,
       learned Senior Advocate has appeared on behalf
       of the assessee.
3.1    Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG appearing on
       behalf of the Revenue has vehemently submitted
       that in the facts and circumstances of the case
       and while dealing with the relevant provisions of
       the Act, 1961, the High Court has materially erred
       in relying upon the decision of this Court in the
       case of
Piara Singh
(supra).
It is submitted that
       as such the AO, CIT(A) and ITAT have correctly
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023             Page 6 of 92
distinguished the judgment in case of the
Piara
       Singh
(supra) as the same pertained to an
       assessee who was engaged in the business of
       smuggling of currency notes and for whom
       confiscation of the currency notes was a loss
       occasioned in pursuing his business, i.e., a loss
       which sprung directly from carrying on of his
       business and was incidental to it. It is submitted
       that due to this, the assessee in the aforesaid
       case was held entitled to deduction under
Section
       10(1)
of Income Tax Act, 1922.      It is submitted
       that however in para 7 of the aforesaid judgment
       which refers to three cases where an exception to
       the aforesaid rule was noted by the Court. It is
       submitted that in
the said decision
this Court
       noted earlier decisions of this Court as well as the
       Andhra Pradesh High Court and the Bombay High
       Court.     It is submitted that in the case of Haji
       Aziz & Abdul Shakoor Bros. v. CIT, AIR 1961
       SC 663, the assessee’s claim for deduction of fine
       paid by him for release of his dates confiscated by
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023              Page 7 of 92
customs authorities, was rejected on the ground
       that the amount paid by way of penalty for breach
       of law was not a normal course of business
       carried on by it. In the other two cases, customs
       authorities had confiscated gold from assessees
       otherwise engaged in legitimate businesses. It is
       submitted that in two relied upon cases of Andhra
       Pradesh High Court and the Bombay High Court
       the assessees claimed the value of gold seized as a
       trading/business loss which is identical to the
       Respondent-Assessee’s claim in the facts of the
       present SLP.        It is submitted that therefore the
       decision of this Court in Haji Aziz & Abdul
       Shakoor Bros.
v. CIT, AIR 1961 SC 663, of the
       Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of
Soni
       Hinduji Kushalji & Co. vs. CIT
, (1973) 89 ITR
       112(AP) and of the Bombay High Court in the
       case of JS Parkar v. VB Palekar, (1974) 94 ITR
       616 (Bom) shall be applicable with full force to
       the facts of the case on hand.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                 Page 8 of 92
3.2    It is submitted that the Andhra Pradesh High
       Court observed in para 10 of the judgment in case
       of
Soni Hinduji Kushalji
(supra) that when a
       claim for deduction is made, the loss must be one
       that springs directly from or is incidental to the
       business which the assessee carries on and not
       every sort or kind of loss which has absolutely no
       nexus or connection with his business. In paras
       11 and 12, the High Court relied on various
       judgments         to     state   that   confiscation        of
       contraband gold is an action in rem and not a
       proceeding in personam and thus, a proceeding in
       rem in the strict sense of the term is an action
       taken directly against the property (i.e., smuggled
       gold) and even if the offender is not known,
       customs authorities have power to confiscate the
       contraband gold. In view of the aforesaid, the
       Court stated that confiscation of contraband gold
       by customs authorities cannot be said to be a
       trading or commercial loss connected with or
       incidental to assessee's business.
The High Court
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                   Page 9 of 92
further relied on Haji Aziz (supra) and various
       other judgments to state that such confiscation of
       smuggled/contraband goods which results in
       infraction of law and has no incidence/connection
       to the business of assessee, cannot be allowed as
       a business loss.
Thus, the aforesaid case which
       has been referred to and distinguished in
Piara
       Singh
(supra), squarely applies to the facts of the
       present case herein.
Similarly, the case of JS
       Parkar (supra) would also be applicable to the
       present case as in the former case, the assessee
       not only claimed the value of the gold confiscated
       as a trading loss but also set off of the said loss
       against his assumed and assessed income from
       undisclosed sources. Furthermore, the value of
       gold was sought to be taxed U/s.69/69A by the
       tax authorities. However, in this case also the
       Bombay High Court rejected the contention that
Section 110
of the Evidence Act (where a person
       found in possession of anything, the onus of
       proving that he was not the owner is on the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023             Page 10 of 92
person who affirmed that he was not owner) was
       inapplicable to taxation proceedings and agreed
       that tax authorities had rightly inferred assessee
       to be owner of seized gold based on circumstantial
       evidence and assessee was not entitled to claim
       value of such gold as a trading loss.
3.3    Shri Balbir Singh, learned ASG has further relied
       upon the decisions of this Court in the case of
Chuharmal v. CIT
, (
1988) 3 SCC 588 and CIT v.
       K Chinnathamban
, (2007) 7 SCC 390, on onus
       of proving ownership being on the person who
       denies ownership and who is in possession. It is
       submitted that ownership of confiscated silver fell
       on the Respondent-Assessee in the present case
       which      he     failed     to   discharge   and   which
       accordingly        rendered       the   tax   authorities’
       concurrent findings on his ownership to be valid.
       It is submitted that when the assessee has been
       unable to deny possession and ownership and in
       fact admitted the same before the Settlement
       Commission as well as the High Court, and
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 11 of 92
further claimed the value of confiscated silver as a
       trading loss before AO, CIT(A) and ITAT, to
       alternatively argue to the contrary and deny
       ownership in order to state that Section 69A
       cannot be applied in his case may not be
       accepted.
3.4    It is submitted by learned ASG that assessee shall
       also not be permitted to claim such loss as a
       business expenditure in view of the express
       prohibition under Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1)
of the Act which was added w.e.f.01.04.1962.
       Reliance is placed on the decisions of this Court
       in the case of
TA Quereshi (Dr.) v. CIT
, (2007) 2
       SCC 759 as well as Apex
Laboratories (P) Ltd. v.
       CIT
, (2022) 7 SCC 98.             It is submitted that
       Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1)
of the Act expressly
       disallows      any      expenditure   incurred   by    an
       assessee for any purpose which is an offence or is
       prohibited by law, which may be claimed as an
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                  Page 12 of 92
expenditure         incurred   for     the   purpose      of
       business/profession.
3.5    It is submitted that in the case of
TA Quereshi
(supra), this Court clarified that the facts of the
       said case pertained to business loss and not
       business expenditure. It is submitted that in the
       said case, ITAT found the assessee engaged in the
       business of manufacturing and selling heroin and
       thus, this Court held that assessee’s claim of
       business loss was allowable as he was in the
       business of heroin.
It is submitted that the case of
       Apex
Laboratories
(supra) distinguishes the
       judgment in
TA Quereshi
(supra) and states that
       the case relating to the assessee bribing doctors,
       did not deal with business loss but business
       expenditure        which     was     disallowable   under
       Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1)
. It is submitted
       that thus either way, neither can the Respondent-
       Assessee claim business loss due to him not being
       in the smuggling business nor can he claim
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 13 of 92
business expenditure as the same is prohibited
       under Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1)
.
3.6    Making above submissions and relying upon the
       above submissions, it is prayed to allow the
       present appeals and restore the ITAT orders.
4.     Shri    Arijit    Prasad,     learned     Senior   Advocate
       appearing        on    behalf      of   the   assessee     has
       vehemently submitted that in the present case the
       respondent – assessee is engaged in the business
       of purchase and sale of silver.               Total sales of
       Rs.1,46,07,314/- of Silver was declared by the
       respondent – assessee with a gross profit of
       Rs.1,32,712/-         for    the    assessment      year    in
       question. Search was conducted by the officers of
       DRI when unaccounted 146 slabs of silver was
       recovered.        The Collector of Customs ordered
       absolute confiscation of the said 146 slabs of
       silver valued at Rs.3,06,036,909/- was proposed
       to be added as deemed income under
Section 69A
of the Act.      The respondent – assessee disputed
       being the owner of the slabs. In the alternative,
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 14 of 92
the respondent also requested that 146 silver
       slabs having been absolutely confiscated by the
       Customs Department, the value of such tradable
       silver slabs should be allowed as loss. However,
       the    Assessing       Officer   made the addition      of
       Rs.3,06,036,909/- as income under
Section 69A
of the Act being a value of 146 silver bars seized
       from the possession of the respondent. The said
       order of addition came to be confirmed upto ITAT,
       however by the impugned judgment and order the
       High Court has answered the reference in favour
       of the assessee by holding that when the value of
       material is added to the income of the respondent,
       as a natural consequence, the loss by confiscation
       of the said material is required to be allowed as
       business loss. It is submitted that it is through
       that before the High Court, the assessee did not
       press the argument regarding the ownership of
       the silver slabs and therefore, the said question
       was not answered by the High Court.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                  Page 15 of 92
4.1    It is submitted that therefore present case is one
       where set off is claimed of the value of the 146
       silver slabs as loss on account of absolute
       confiscation rather than claim of expenditure of
       any penalty and/or fine imposed for infraction of
       law.
4.2    It is submitted that as such the issue in the
       present appeals is fairly covered in favour of the
       assessee in view of the decision of this Court in
       the case of
TA Quereshi (Dr.
) (supra). In
the said
       decision
, it is held that the judgment of the High
       Court applying
Section 37
of the Act to the case of
       business loss on account of absolute confiscation
       of the goods was erroneous. It is submitted that
       the submission of the assessee therein that
Section     37
of   the   Act   related   to   business
       expenditure whereas case of absolute confiscation
       was one of business loss has been accepted.
4.3    It is submitted that in the present case, upon
       search, 146 silver slabs were found to be in
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 16 of 92
possession of the assessee. The value of the said
       silver     slabs      was    determined   to      be     Rs.
       3,06,036,909/- and the same was added to the
       computation of income of the assessee under
Section 69A
of the Act as undisclosed valuable
       article which was not recorded in the books of
       account of the assessee.
4.4    It is submitted that however as the respondent –
       assessee was engaged in the business of trading
       of silver and the said silver slabs were in
       possession of the assessee for the purpose of
       trading, absolute confiscation of the said silver
       slabs would result in loss of stock in trade and
       the value thereof would be available as deduction
       as business/trading loss.         It is submitted that
       therefore the decision of this Court in the case of
T.A. Quereshi
(Supra) shall be clearly applicable.
4.5    It is submitted that in the case of
T.A. Quereshi
(Supra) this Court has drawn a distinction
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 17 of 92
between claim of deduction as expenditure of
       penalty/fine as against claim of business loss on
       account of confiscation of goods which are
       unaccounted stock in trade. It is submitted that
       in case of claim of deduction as expenditure of
       any fine and/or penalty, the Courts have held
       that such deduction would not be available to the
       assessee as it would defeat the very purpose
       behind such penal action. Whereas, in case of
       claim of set off as business loss, the unaccounted
       goods though added to the income of assessee but
       is not available to the assessee for his trade.
It is
       submitted that while extending the benefit of such
       set off, this Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) and
T.A. Quereshi
(Supra) have held that
       the assessee shall be entitled to the set off as
       business loss.
4.6    It is submitted that unlike a case of imposition of
       redemption fine where the confiscated goods are
       released on payment of such amount, absolute
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023               Page 18 of 92
confiscation of the goods results in the said goods
       vesting with the Central Government. In such
       cases, though the value of the goods is added to
       the income of the assessee, but the assessee has
       no option of redeeming the goods for its onward
       trade. Thus, there is an evident distinction
       between a case where deduction is sought of any
       penalty and/or fine as allowable expenditure and
       a case where business loss is claimed on account
       of absolute confiscation of the goods which results
       in loss of stock in trade. It is submitted that
       present one is a case where the set off is claimed
       as    business       loss    on   account   of   absolute
       confiscation of the silver bars and not of any
       penalty and/or fine. The judgments cited during
       the course of hearing by the Petitioner are
       therefore rendered on distinct and distinguishable
       facts and would not be applicable to the facts of
       the present case.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                   Page 19 of 92
4.7    It is submitted that the said distinction has also
       been statutorily recognized. As highlighted by the
       appellant,
Section 37
which deals with allowance
       and deduction of expenditure, was amended vide
Finance Act, 1998
w.e.f. 01.04.1962 whereby
       Explanation 1 was added to clarify that any
       expenditure incurred by an assessee for any
       purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited
       by law shall not be deemed to have been incurred
       for the purpose of business or profession and no
       deduction or allowance shall be made in respect
       of    such      expenditure.   In   contrast   thereto,
       consciously no such restriction has been brought
       in law with regard to set off of the value of the
       unaccounted stock in trade which have been
       absolutely confiscated.
4.8    Making above submissions it is prayed to dismiss
       the present appeals.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                 Page 20 of 92
5.     Heard learned counsel for the respective parties at
       length.
6.     The     short       question   which    is     posed     for
       consideration before this Court is whether the
       High Court has erred in law in allowing the
       respondent – assessee the loss of confiscation of
       silver bars by DRI officials as a business loss,
       relying upon the decision of this Court in the case
       of
CIT Patiala vs. Piara Singh
, 1980 Supp SCC
       166?
6.1    While considering the aforesaid question, at the
       outset, it is required to be noted that the
       provisions of
Section 37(1)
under the Act has been
       amended        by
Finance   (No.2)   Act,    1998
by
       introducing         Explanation    1    thereto        w.e.f.
       01.04.1962 wherein any expenditure incurred by
       the assessee for any purpose which is an offence
       or prohibited by law is not an allowable business
       expense. It is true that in the present case the
       respondent - assessee did not claim value of silver
       bars confiscation as business expenses thus
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 21 of 92
claimed      as     business   loss.       However,     the
       amendment to
Section 37
might have some
       bearing on the issue involved.
6.2    On going through the impugned judgment and
       order passed by the High Court, it appears that
       the High Court has simply relied upon the
       decision of this Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra).
Having gone through the decision of this
       Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra), we are
       of the opinion that the High Court has materially
       erred in relying upon the decision of this Court in
       the case of
Piara Singh
(supra).
6.3    In the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) the assessee
       was found to be in the business of smuggling of
       currency notes and to that it was found that
       confiscation       of   currency   notes    was   a    loss
       occasioned in pursuing his business i.e. a loss
       which sprung directly from carrying on of his
       business and was incidental to it.          Due to this,
       the assessee in the said case held entitled to
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 22 of 92
deduction under
Section 10(1)
of the Income Tax
       Act, 1922.
In view of the above fact situation this
       Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra)
       distinguished the decisions of this Court in the
       case of Haji Aziz & Abdul Shakoor Bros.
reported in AIR 1961 SC 663, and the decision
       in the case of
Soni Hinduji Kushalji & Co. vs.
       CIT
, (1973) 89 ITR 112(AP) and not agreed with
       the decision of the Bombay High Court in the case
       of
J.S. Parkar vs. VB Palekar
, (1974 94 ITR
       616 (Bom).
It is to be noted that in all the
       aforesaid three cases which were relied upon by
       the Revenue in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra)
       were found to be involved in legitimate businesses
       and not smuggling business but however they
       were found to have smuggled goods contrary to
       law which resulted in an infraction of law and
       resultant confiscation by customs authorities.
6.4    In the case of Haji Aziz (supra) the assessee
       claimed for deduction of fine paid by him for
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                Page 23 of 92
release of his dates confiscated by customs
       authorities was rejected on the ground that the
       amount paid by way of penalty for breach of law
       was not a normal business carried out by it. In
       the case of
Soni Hinduji Kushalji
(supra) and
       JS Parkar (supra), the customs authorities had
       confiscated        gold      from   assessees     otherwise
       engaged in legitimate businesses. In the aforesaid
       two cases the assessee claimed the value of gold
       seized as a trading/business loss.              It was held
       that    the    assessees      are   not   entitled   to   the
       deductions as claimed as business loss.
6.5    In the case of
Soni Hinduji
(supra), the Andhra
       Pradesh High Court held that when a claim for
       deduction is made, the loss must be one that
       springs directly from or is incidental to the
       business which the assessee carries on and not
       every sort or kind of loss which has absolutely no
       nexus or connection with his business.                It was
       observed that confiscation of contraband gold was
       an action in rem and not a proceeding in
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 24 of 92
personam and thus, a proceeding in rem in the
       strict sense of the term is an action taken directly
       against the property (i.e. smuggled gold) and even
       if the offender is not known, the customs
       authorities       have       power    to   confiscate    the
       contraband gold.
6.6    In the case of JS Parkar (supra), the assessee
       not only claimed the value of the gold confiscated
       as a trading loss but also set off of the said loss
       against his assumed and assessed income from
       undisclosed sources.            The value of gold was
       sought to be taxed under
Section 69
/
69A
of the
       Act by the tax authorities. However, the Bombay
       High Court held the assessee to be the owner of
       the smuggled confiscated gold and the assessee
       was not entitled to claim value of such gold as a
       trading loss.
6.7    In   the    present      case   the    ownership    of   the
       confiscated silver bars of the assessee now cannot
       be disputed and even the assessee is not
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 25 of 92
disputing the same. Even on that also there are
       concurrent findings by all the authorities below
       and including the customs authorities. Therefore,
       the next question which is posed for consideration
       before this Court is whether the assessee can
       claim the business loss of the value of the silver
       bar confiscated and whether the decision of this
       Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) would
       be applicable?
6.8    To answer to the aforesaid question, it can be
       seen that in the present case the main business of
       the assessee is dealing in silver.       His business
       cannot be said to be smuggling of the silver bars
       as was the case in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra).         As    observed   hereinabove   in   the
       assessee’s case he was carrying on an otherwise
       legitimate silver business and in attempt to make
       larger profits, he indulged into smuggling of silver,
       which was an infraction of law.
In that view of
       the matter the decision of this Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) which has been relied upon
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                 Page 26 of 92
by the High Court while passing the impugned
       judgment and order and it has been relied upon
       by the assessee shall not be applicable to the
       facts of the case.
On hand or the other hand the
       decision of this Court in the case of Haji Aziz
       (1961) 41 ITR 350 (SC) and the decisions of the
       Andhra Pradesh High Court and the Bombay High
       Court which were pressed into service by the
       Revenue in
Piara             Singh
(supra)     would be
       applicable with full force.
7.
In view of the above and for the reason stated
       above and looking to the business of the assessee
       namely silver business and was not in the
       business of smuggling silver, the decision of this
       Court in the case of
Piara Singh
(supra) shall
       not be applicable and therefore the impugned
       judgment and order passed by the High Court
       quashing and setting aside the order passed by
       the    Assessing       Officer,   CIT(A)   and    the    ITAT
       rejecting the claim of the Assessee to treat the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 27 of 92
silver bars confiscated by the customs authorities
       as business loss and consequently value allowing
       the same as business loss is unsustainable and
       the same deserves to be quashed and set side.
8.1    In view of the above and for the reason stated
       above present appeals succeed.     The impugned
       judgment and order passed by the High Court is
       hereby quashed and set aside and the order
       passed by the assessing officer, CIT(A) and the
       ITAT are hereby restored.
Present appeals are accordingly allowed. No
       costs.
…………………………J.
                                      (M. R. SHAH)



                                    ……………………………J.
                                     (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
April 24, 2023
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023             Page 28 of 92
REPORTABLE
              IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
               CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

              CIVIL APPEAL NO. 7689-7690 OF 2022


 THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX,
 JAIPUR                      …APPELLANT

                                    VERSUS

 PRAKASH CHAND LUNIA (D) THR
 LRS & ANR.                                  …RESPONDENTS


                            JUDGMENT


M. M. Sundresh, J.
1. The present appeal is filed by the Revenue,

   challenging the decision of the Division Bench of

   the Rajasthan High Court at Jaipur, drawing a

   distinction between a claim for deduction of a loss

   incurred in an illegal business, as against a claim of

   a loss qua a legitimate business, though an
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                 Page 29 of 92
illegality is attached to it. The aforesaid issue is to

   be tested on an offence committed leading to

   either a penalty or confiscation.
2. Heard Mr. Balbir Singh, learned Additional Solicitor

   General,       Mr.     AK    Shrivastava,   learned   senior

   counsel for the Appellant and Mr. Arjit Prasad,

   learned senior counsel for the Respondents.
3. have gone through the well-merited judgment

   rendered by my learned brother, Justice M.R. Shah.
While concurring with the ultimate conclusion

   arrived at in overturning the decision of the High

   Court, I would like to give my own reasoning on the

   aforesaid aspect. The facts being narrated with

   utmost clarity by my learned brother, only those
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                  Page 30 of 92
which are required in support of the reasoning are

   being recorded.
4. The Director of Revenue Intelligence set out a

   search       at     the      business     premises      of     the

   Respondent/assessee. The recovery yielded silver

   slabs/silver      ingots.        The   assessee   was     in   the

   business of making jewellery.
5. The Respondent/assessee filed his return for the

   Assessment Year 1989-1990 followed by a petition

   before the Income Tax Settlement Commission.
The     Collector       of   Customs      vide    order      dated

   18.12.1990 ordered confiscation of goods and

   imposed penalty. It was done on the premise that

   the goods were smuggled by the assessee. A claim

   was made by the assessee that the loss on account

   of confiscation would be allowable as trading loss
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 31 of 92
being incidental to the business, and hence,

   deductible. This argument was duly rejected as he

   was neither doing the business of smuggling, nor

   he owned the silver. The plea of ownership was

   given up by the Respondent/assessee before the

   High Court, and therefore, the decision of the

   assessing officer in bringing the loss suffered under
Section      69A
of    the   Income   Tax   Act,   1961

   (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”), has become

   final.
6. Before the Hight Court, the Respondent/assessee

   placing reliance upon the judgment of this Court in
Commissioner of Income Tax v. Piara Singh
(1980) Supp. SCC 166, inter alia contended that

   smuggling by itself being prohibited in law, any

   loss occurred thereunder is liable for deduction.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                   Page 32 of 92
The aforesaid argument made, found acceptance

   at the hands of the High Court, which is sought to

   be impugned by the Revenue before us.
RELEVANT PROVISIONS OF THE INCOME TAX

ACT, 1961

       “2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context
       otherwise requires,—


              xxx    xxx    xxx


              (13)"business" includes any trade, commerce or
       manufacture or any adventure or concern in the nature
       of trade, commerce or manufacture;”
7. This provision being a definition clause merely

   defines various activities which could be termed as

   a business.
Section 2(13)
of the Act gives a broad

   definition to ‘business’.
Section 28
of the Act

   comes under the heading ‘Profits and Gains of
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 33 of 92
Business or Profession’. Various types of income

   enumerated thereunder are made chargeable to

   income tax. The income, as referred in
Section 28
of the Act, has to be computed in the manner as

   prescribed under
Section 30
to
43D
of the Act,

   which is accordingly provided under
Section 29
of

   the Act.
Section 37
:
“37 General.- (1) Any expenditure (not being
       expenditure of the nature described in
sections 30
to
36
and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or
       personal expenses of the assessee), laid out or
       expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of
       the business or profession shall be allowed in
       computing the income chargeable under the head
       "Profits and gains of business or profession".
[Explanation 1.]—For the removal of doubts, it is
       hereby declared that any expenditure incurred by an
       assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which
       is prohibited by law shall not be deemed to have been
       incurred for the purpose of business or profession and
       no deduction or allowance shall be made in respect of
       such expenditure.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 34 of 92
8.
Section 37
of the Act, being one of the

              provisions meant for computing income

              from     profits      or   gains     of    business       or

              profession, is a residuary and omnibus

              provision       which      intends        to   cover      all

              expenditure to the exclusion of those

              mentioned under
Section 30
to
36
of the

              Act, apart from being in the nature of

              capital expenditure or personal expenses of

              the assessee. Therefore, the object behind

              this provision is very clear as it includes

              ‘any expenditure’. The second mandate of

              this provision is that the expenditure will

              have to be laid out or expended wholly and

              exclusively for the purpose of the business

              or profession to come into the fold of
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                            Page 35 of 92
income chargeable to tax as profit and

              gains of business or profession.
9.            An ambiguity arose as to whether

              a business, as defined under
Section 2(13)
of the Act, and as dealt with under
Section

              37
of the Act, would include a deduction

              when the said expenditure is incurred for

              any     purpose       which        is   an       offence    or

              prohibited by law.
10. Since an anomaly has been created by

              the    interpretation         of    the      pari    materia

              provision under the
Income Tax Act, 1922
(hereinafter referred to as “the
Old Act
”),

              viz.
Section        10(1)
and        (2),    therefore,

              Explanation-I to
Section 37
of the Act came
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                              Page 36 of 92
into the statute book with retrospective

              effect from 01.04.1962 through the
Finance

              (No.2) Act
1998, (Act 21 of 1998).
11. The purpose of the insertion of the aforesaid

   Explanation was explained by the Central Board of

   Direct Taxes Circular No. 772 dated 23.12.1998,

       “Disallowance of illegal expenses
       20.1
Section 37
of the Income-tax Act is amended to
       provide that any expenditure incurred by an assessee
       for any purpose which is an offence or which is
       prohibited by law shall not be deemed to have been
       incurred for the purposes of business or profession and
       no deduction or allowance shall be made in respect of
       such expenditure. This amendment will result in
       disallowance of the claims made by certain assessees
       in respect of payments on account of protection
       money, extortion, hafta, bribes etc. as business
       expenditure. It is well decided that unlawful expendi-
       ture is not an allowable deduction in computation of
       income.
20.2 This amendment will take effect retrospectively
       from 1st April, 1962 and will, accordingly, apply in
       relation to the assessment year 1962-63 and
       subsequent years.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 37 of 92
12. Explanation-I makes a declaration to remove any

   possible doubts to reckon a loss suffered in the

   form of expenditure for any purpose which is an

   offence or one that is prohibited by law. There is no

   difficulty     in   holding      that   this     explanation      is

   clarificatory in nature. Applying the principle of

   literal interpretation with the intendment being

   very clear, giving no room for further doubts,

   coupled with the fact that there is no challenge to

   it, the meaning appears to be rather very clear. It

   seeks to prohibit a deduction of any expenditure

   incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is

   an offence or which is prohibited by law. Due

   regard will have to be given to the words ‘any

   expenditure’ and ‘any purpose’. The reiteration

   being      a   legislative       clarification   of   the    main
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 38 of 92
provision is required to be taken note of, as such,

   the power of judicial review over an explanation,

   which has been introduced to explain and remove

   the doubts of the main provision, is rather limited.
13. Though the provision speaks of expenditure while

   not making a specific reference to loss, one has to

   press      into    service       the   accepted   commercial

   practice and trading principles. If one is to treat the

   expenditure as a genus, a loss would become a

   specie. All losses would become expenditures but

   not vice versa. A commercial loss in trade arising

   out of a business being carried on and incidental to

   it would be a deductible loss as
laid down by
this

   Court in
Badridas Daga v. CIT
, (1959) SCR 690.
There is a similarity in the test qua a loss as
laid

   down by
this Court, and expenditure under Section
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 39 of 92
37 of the Act. Perhaps, there is a distinction when

   it comes to the accounting treatment of the two

   concepts. Thus, there is no difficulty in holding that

   the word ‘any expenditure’ mentioned in
Section

   37
of the Act takes in its sweep loss occasioned in

   the course of business, as well. Therefore, I agree

   with the view of my learned brother that
Section

   37
of the Act and Explanation 1 will have a bearing

   in the present case.
Section 115BBE
“
Section    115BBE
.-      “Tax     on   income
referred to in
section 68
or
section 69
or
section
       69A
or
section 69B
or
section 69C
or
section
       69D
.- (1) Where the total income of an assessee,—
(a)     includes any income referred to in section
                    68, section 69, section 69A, section 69B,
                    section 69C or section 69D and reflected in
                    the return of income furnished under section
                    139; or
(b)        determined by the Assessing Officer
                    includes any income referred to in
section
                    68
,
section 69
,
section 69A
,
section 69B
,
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 40 of 92
section 69C
or
section 69D
, if such income is
                     not covered under clause (a),
              the income-tax payable shall be the aggregate of
       —
(i)     the amount of income-tax calculated on the
                     income referred to in clause (a) and clause
(b), at the rate of sixty per cent; and
(ii)    the amount of income-tax with which the
                     assessee would have been chargeable had
                     his total income been reduced by the
                     amount of income referred to in clause (i).
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
       Act, no deduction in respect of any expenditure or
       allowance or set off of any loss shall be allowed to the
       assessee under any provision of this Act in computing
       his income referred to in clause (a) and clause (b) of
       sub-section (1).”
14.
Section 115BBE
of the Act deals with levy of

     tax on income as mentioned in
Section 68
,
69
,

     and
69A
to
69D
of the Act. If a case comes under
Section 115BBE
sub-section (1) of the Act, the

     rate of income tax shall be at 60%.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                         Page 41 of 92
15. The object of this provision is to fill up the

     loopholes and to make sure unaccounted money

     either generated or used, more so in the nature

     of Black Money, is penalized. When this provision

     was introduced in the year 2012, the rate of tax

     was fixed at the rate of 30%. The Bill also speaks

     about the objective behind not allowing any

     deduction to the assessee in computing deemed

     income under
Section 68
,
69
and
69A
to
69D
of

     the Act. That was the reason why a decision was

     made to impose greater tax burden. The rate of

     tax was increased by a subsequent amendment

     to 60%.
16. Sub-section (2) of
Section 115BBE
starts with

     a non-obstante clause.         It will have precedence

     over any other provision contained in the Act,
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023               Page 42 of 92
while dealing with a deduction in respect of any

     expenditure or allowance or set off of any loss. In

     other words, no such deduction would be allowed

     under any provision of the Act in computing an

     assessee’s income under sub-section (1). An

     amendment has been introduced by
Finance Act,

     2016
with the inclusion of ‘set off of any loss’

     being not allowable. Sub-section (2) once again

     does not speak about loss but the fact that it

     makes a reference to ‘set off of any loss’ would

     reiterate the view taken earlier, while considering

     the scope and ambit of
Section 37
of the Act, that

     such a loss has to be read into expenditure, at

     least while applying the test for the purpose of

     deduction. To make the position clear one has to

     understand that the amendment merely speaks

     about the right of the assessee to set off the loss
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023           Page 43 of 92
which presupposes that the loss has to be treated

     as a facet of expenditure.
17. A little bit of interplay between
Section

     115BBE
and
Section 37(1)
of the Act might throw

     more light on both the provisions. If a loss in

     pursuance to an offence or prohibited business

     cannot be brought under
Section 115BBE
of the

     Act for income assessed under 68, 69 and 69A to

     69D of the Act, which deals with unexplained

     income, expenditure etc., it can never be said

     that the same would be brought under
Section

     37(1)
of the Act, despite the fact that the

     objective       behind         both   the   provisions     are

     overlapping         with       some   connection.
Section

     115BBE
being a subsequent legislation, the true
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 44 of 92
meaning of
Section 37(1)
can be understood on

     that basis.
18. Having understood the provisions, I shall now

     consider the decisions relied upon at the Bar as

     they deal with the interpretation of the provisions

     governing.
19.
Badridas Daga v. CIT
, (1959) SCR 690

     19.1 This Court was dealing with a loss suffered

     due to an embezzlement by an employee of the

     assessee. While interpreting
Section 10(2)
of the

     Old Act over a claim made for deduction, for

     which there was no specific provision, reliance

     was made on the accepted commercial practices

     and trading principles.        Resultantly, it was held

     that the deduction was allowable in a case where

     there is no prohibition either expressed or implied
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                Page 45 of 92
under the Act. Thus, the Court has made it clear

     that in the absence of any prohibition, as stated

     above, a claim for deduction of a loss is allowable

     so long as it emanates directly from the carrying

     on of the business, being incidental to it. In other

     words, it does not include loss of any nature even

     if it has some connection with the business, if the

     same cannot be said to be incidental to the

     business.
19.2 The court went on to hold that the payment

     of salary to an employee being paid for the

     purpose of business, is deductible under the

     general provision, therefore, logically any loss

     occasioned on the action of an employee would

     be incidental to the business.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023            Page 46 of 92
19.3 Considering the aforesaid, it can be said that

     there is a similarity between the test laid down

     for deduction of an expense in the residuary

     omnibus provision under
Section 10(2)(xv)
of the

     Old Act and the test for deduction of loss based

     on commercial practices and trading principles.
The decision is therefore supporting the above

     stated interpretation of
Section 37
of the Act.
19.4 Relevant paragraphs:
“The question whether monies embezzled by an
       agent or employee are allowable as deduction in
       computing the profits of a business under
s. 10
of the
       Act has come up for consideration frequently before
       the Indian Courts, and the decisions have not been
       quite uniform. Before discussing them, it is necessary
       that we should examine the principles that are in law
       applicable to the determination of the question. Three
       grounds have been put forward in support of the claim
       for deduction: (1) that the loss sustained by reason of
       embezzlement is a bad debt allowable under
s. 10(2)
(xi) of the Act; (2) that it is a business expense falling
       within
s. 10(2)(xv)
of the Act; and (3) that it is a trading
       loss, which must be taken into account in computing
       the profits under
s. 10(1)
of the Act. As regards the first
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 47 of 92
ground, the authorities have consistently held that the
       deduction is not admissible under
s. 10(2)(xi)
of the
       Act, and that, in our view, is correct. A debt arises out
       of a contract between the parties, express or implied,
       and when an agent misappropriates monies belonging
       to his employer in fraud of him and in breach of his
       obligations to him, it cannot be said that he owes those
       monies under any agreement. He is no doubt liable in
       law to make good that amount, but that is not an
       obligation arising out of a contract, express or implied.
Nor does it make a difference that in the accounts of
       the business the amounts embezzled are shown as
       debits, the amounts realised towards them, if any, as
       credits, and the balance is finally written off. They are
       merely journal entries adjusting the accounts and do
       not import a contractual liability. Nor can a claim for
       deduction be admitted under
s. 10(2)(xv)
, because
       moneys which are withdrawn by the employee out of
       the business till without authority and in fraud of the
       proprietor can in no sense be said to be “an
       expenditure laid out or expended wholly and
       exclusively” for the purpose of the business. The
       controversy therefore narrows itself to the question
       whether amounts lost through embezzlement by an
       employee are a trading loss which could be deducted in
       computing the profits of a business under
s. 10(1)
. It is
       to be noted that while s, 10(1) imposes a charge on the
       profits or gains of a trade, it does not provide how
       those profits are to be computed.
Section 10(2)
enumerates various items which are admissible as
       deductions, but it is well settled that they are not
       exhaustive of all allowances which could be made in
       ascertaining profits taxable under
s. 10(1)
.
In
Income
       Tax Commissioner v. Chitnavis
[(1932) LR 59 IA 290,
       296, 297] the point for decision was whether a bad
       debt could be deducted under
s. 10(1)
of the Act, there
       having been in the Act, as it then stood, no provision
       corresponding to
s. 10(2)(xi)
for deduction of such a
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 48 of 92
debt. In answering the question in the affirmative, Lord
       Russel observed:
“Although the Act nowhere in terms
                authorizes the deduction of bad debts of
                business, such a deduction is necessarily
                allowable. What are chargeable in income
                tax in respect of a business are the profits
                and gains of a year; and in assessing the
                amount of the profits and gains of a year
                account must necessarily be taken of all
                losses incurred, otherwise you would not
                arrive at the true profits and gains.”


       It is likewise well settled that profits and gains which
       are liable to be taxed under
s. 10(1)
are what are
       understood to be such according to ordinary
       commercial principles. “The word ‘profits’ … is to be
       understood”, observed Lord Halsbury in Gresham Life
       Assurance Society v. Styles [(1892) AC 309, 315 : 3 TC
       185, 188] “in its natural and proper sense — in a sense
       which no commercial man would misunderstand”.
Referring to these observations Lord Macmillan said in
Pondicherry Railway Co. v. Income Tax Commissioner
[(1931) LR 58 IA 239, 252]:
“English authorities can only be utilized
                with caution in the consideration of Indian
                income tax cases owing to the differences
                in the relevant legislation, but the principle
laid down by
Lord Chancellor Halsbury in
                Gresham Life Assurance Society v. Styles
                [(1892) AC 309, 315 : 3 TC 185, 188] , is of
                general application unaffected by the
                specialities of the English tax system.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                         Page 49 of 92
The result is that when a claim is made for a deduction
       for which there is no specific provision in
s. 10(2)
,
       whether it is admissible or not will depend on whether,
       having regard to accepted commercial practice and
       trading principles, it can be said to arise out of the
       carrying on of the business and to be incidental to it. If
       that is established, then the deduction must be
       allowed, provided of course there is no prohibition
       against it, express or implied, in the Act.
These being the governing principles, in deciding
       whether loss resulting from embezzlement by an
       employee in a business is admissible as a deduction
       under
s. 10(1)
what has to be considered is whether it
       arises out of the carrying on of the business and is
       incidental to it. Viewing the question as a businessman
       would, it seems difficult to maintain that it does not. A
       business especially such as is calculated to yield
       taxable profits has to be carried on through agents,
       cashiers, clerks and peons. Salary and remuneration
       paid to them are admissible under
s. 10(2)(xv)
as
       expenses incurred for the purpose of the business. If
       employment of agents is incidental to the carrying on
       of business, it must logically follow that losses which
       are incidental to such employment are also incidental
       to the carrying on of the business. Human nature being
       what it is, it is impossible to rule out the possibility of
       an employee taking advantage of his position as such
       employee and misappropriating the funds of his
       employer,      and    the   loss    arising  from     such
       misappropriation must be held to arise out of the
       carrying on of business and to be incidental to it. And
       that is how it would be dealt with according to ordinary
       commercial principles of trading.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                         Page 50 of 92
At the same time, it should be emphasised that
       the loss for which a deduction could be made under
s.
       10(1)
must be one that springs directly from the
       carrying on of the business and is incidental to it and
       not any loss sustained by the assessee, even if it has
       some connection with his business. If, for example, a
       thief were to break overnight into the premises of a
       moneylender and run away with funds secured therein,
       that must result in the depletion of the resources
       available to him for lending and the loss must, in that
       sense, be a business loss, but it is not one incurred in
       the running of the business, but is one to which all
       owners of properties are exposed whether they do
       business or not. The loss in such a case may be said to
       fall on the assessee not as a person carrying on
       business but as owner of funds. This distinction, though
       fine, is very material as on it will depend whether
       deduction could be made under
s. 10(1)
or not.”
                    (emphasis supplied)
20. Haji Aziz & Abdul Shakoor Bros. v. CIT,

       (1961) 2 SCR 651

     20.1 The three-Judge bench of this Court in the

     aforesaid case was concerned with two principal

     issues which we are dealing with at present. In

     clear terms it has been held that an expenditure
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 51 of 92
is not deductible unless it is a commercial loss in

     trade. A penalty incurred for an infraction of law

     could never be termed as a commercial loss in

     carrying      on      business,     apart   from     being     an

     abnormal incident, consequently, it cannot be

     deducted.        It    falls   on   the   assesse     in   some

     character other than that of a trader. A mere

     connection between the loss and the business of

     the assesse per se can never be the sole factor.
To put it simply, this Court has made the position

     abundantly clear that a penalty can never be

     understood as a commercial expenditure/loss for

     the purpose of the business nor a disbursement

     made to earn profit. It was further noted that a

     confiscation          is   a   proceeding    in     rem,     and

     therefore, the penalty is imposed on the goods.
That being the position, in any case, an assessee
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 52 of 92
cannot claim deduction of loss in a case of

     confiscation/penalty, as arising out of carrying on

     of the business or incidental to it.
20.2 Relevant paragraphs:
“In support of his argument counsel for the
       appellant firm referred to
Maqbool Hussain v. State of
       Bombay
etc. [(1953) SCR 730] and to the following
       passage at p. 742 where Bhagwati, J., said:
“Confiscation is no doubt one of the
                penalties which the Customs Authorities
                can impose but that is more in the nature
                of proceedings in rem than proceedings in
                personam, the object being to confiscate
                the offending goods which have been dealt
                with contrary to the provisions of the law
                and in respect of the confiscation also an
                option is given to the owner of the goods
                to pay in lieu of confiscation such fine as
                the officer thinks fit. All this is for the
                enforcement     of   the    levy   of   and
                safeguarding the recovery of the sea
                customs duties.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 53 of 92
Similar observations were made by S.K. Das, J.,
       in
Shewpujanrai     Indrasanrai     Ltd. v. Collector of
       Customs & Ors.
[(1959) SCR 821 at p. 836] where it
       was said that a distinction must be drawn between an
       action in rem and proceeding in personam and that
       confiscation of the goods is a proceeding in rem and
       the penalties are enforced against the goods whether
       the offender is known or not.
The view taken by this
       Court in the other two cases cited by counsel for the
       appellants i.e.
Leo Roy Frey v. Superintendent, District
       Jail
,  Amritsar [(1958)     SCR      822]     and Thomas
       Dana v. State of Punjab [1959 Supp (1) SCR 274 at p.
       298] is the same.
In Dana case [(1959) SCR 821 at p.
       836] Subba Rao, J., said at p. 298:
“If the authority concerned makes an order of
             confiscation it is only a proceeding in rem and
             the penalty is enforced against the goods. On
             the other hand, if it imposes a penalty against
             the person concerned, it is a proceeding
             against the person and he is punished for
             committing the offence. It follows that in the
             case of confiscation there is no prosecution
             against the person or imposition of a penalty
             on him.”


       In Maqbool Hussain’s case [(1953) SCR 730] the
       question for decision was whether after proceedings
       had been taken under the Sea Customs Act an accused
       person could be prosecuted and could or could not rely
       upon the plea of double jeopardy, it was held that he
       could not.
In
Shewpujanrai
case [(1959) SCR 821 at p.
       836] the contention raised was that after proceedings
       had been taken under the
Foreign Exchange Regulation
       Act
it was not open to the Customs Authorities to take
       any action under the Sea Customs Act.
The other two
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 54 of 92
cases were similar to
Maqbool Hussain
case [(1953)
       SCR 730] . The contention now raised before us is quite
       different. What is to be decided in the present case is
       whether the penalty which was paid by the appellant
       firm was an allowable deduction within
s. 10(2)(xv)
of
       the Income-tax Act which provides:
S. 10
. (2)(xv) “any expenditure (not being in
             the nature of capital expenditure or personal
             expenses of the assessee) laid out or
             expended wholly and exclusively for the
             purpose of such business, profession or
             vocation.”


       The words “for the purpose of such business” have
       been construed in Inland Revenue v. Anglo Brewing Co.
       Ltd. [(1925) 12 TC 803, 813] to mean “for the purpose
       of keeping the trade going and of making it pay”. The
       essential condition of allowance is that the expenditure
       should have been laid out or expended wholly and
       exclusively for the purpose of such business.
In deciding this case, reference to decisions in
       some English cases will be fruitful.
In
Commissioners of
       Inland Revenue v. Warnes & Co.
[(1919) 2 KB 444] , the
       assessee who carried on the business of oil exporters
       were sued for a penalty on an information exhibited by
       the Attorney-General under the Sea Customs
       Consolidation Act for breach of orders and
       proclamations. The matter was settled by consent on
       the assessee agreeing to pay a mitigated penalty of £
       2000. All imputations on the moral culpability of the
       assessees were withdrawn. The provisions of the Act
       under which this information was lodged and penalty
       paid was similar to the provisions of the Indian Sea
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 55 of 92
Customs Act
. This amount was held not to be a proper
       deduction because in order to be within the provision
       similar to s. 10(2)(xv) of the Indian Act the loss had to
       be something within commercial contemplation and in
       the nature of a commercial loss.
Rowlatt, J., relying on
       the observation of Lord Loreburn, L.C., in Strong &
       Co. v. Woodifield [(1906) AC 448] said at p. 452:
“but it seems to me that a penal liability of
                this kind cannot be regarded as a loss
                connected with or arising out of a trade. I
                think that a loss connected with or arising
                out of a trade must, at any rate, amount to
                something in the nature of a loss which is
                contemplable and in the nature of a
                commercial loss. I do not intend that to be
                an exhaustive definition, but I do not think
                it is possible to say that when a fine which
                is what the penalty in the present case
                amounted to has been inflicted upon a
                trading body, it can be said that that is a
                ‘loss connected, with or arising out of’ the
                trade within the meaning of this rule”.
This statement of the law was approved in
       the Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Alexander Von
       Glehn & Co. Ltd. [(1920) 2 KB 553] where also in similar
       circumstances by consent of the assessee penalty of £
       3,000 was paid and the penalty plus the costs were
       claimed as deduction in arriving at the profits. The
       Special Commissioners had found that the penalty and
       costs were incurred by the assessee in the course of
       carrying on their trade and so incidental thereto and
       were admissible deductions. Rowlatt, J., on a reference
       held it to be a non-deductible item. This judgment was
       affirmed on appeal by the Court of Appeal. Lord
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 56 of 92
Sterndale, M.R., was of the opinion that it was
       immaterial whether technically the proceedings were
       criminal or not. The money that was paid was paid as a
       penalty and it did not matter if in the information it was
       called a forfeiture.
It was argued by the assesses in that case that
       no moral obliquity was attributed to them and that it
       did not matter whether the expense was incurred in
       consequence of an infraction of the law or whether it
       was a penalty for doing an illegal act. At p. 565 Lord
       Sterndale said:
“Now what is the position here? This
                business could perfectly well be carried on
                without any infraction of the law. This
                penalty was imposed because of an
                infraction of the law, and that does not
                seem to me to be, any more than the
                expense which had to be paid in Strong &
                Co. v. Woodifield [(1906)      AC      448]
                appeared to Lord Davey to be, a
                disbursement or expense which was laid
                out or expended for the purpose of such
                trade….”


       Warrington, L.J. said at p. 569:
“It is a sum which the persons conducting
                the trade have had to pay because in
                conducting it they have so acted as to
                render themselves liable to this penalty. It
                is not a commercial loss, and I think when
                the Act speaks of a loss connected with or
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 57 of 92
arising out of such trade it means a
                commercial loss, connected with or arising
                out of the trade.”


       In Strong & Co. v. Woodifield [(1906) AC 448] a brewing
       company owned a licensed house in which they carried
       on the business of inn-keepers. They incurred a liability
       to pay damages on account of injuries caused to a
       visitor, by the falling in of a chimney. This sum was
       held not to be allowable as a deduction in computing
       the profits. Lord Loreburn, L.C., in his speech said no
       sum could be deducted unless it be money wholly and
       exclusively laid out or expended for the purpose of
       such trade and that only such losses could be deducted
       as were connected with it in the sense that they were
       really incidental to the trade itself and they could not
       be deducted if they were mainly incidental to some
       other vocation or fell on the trader in some character
       other than that of a trader. Lord Davey observed:
“I think the disbursements permitted are
                such as are made for that purpose. It is
                not enough that the disbursement is made
                in the course of, or arise out of, or is
                connected with the trade or is made out of
                the profits of the trade. It must be made
                for the purpose of earning profits.”
       The following passage from Lord Sterndale's judgment
       at p. 566 in Von Glehn case [(1920) 2 KB 553] from
       which we have already quoted shows the effect of
       incurring a penalty as a result of a breach of the law:
“During the course of the trading this
                company committed a breach of the law.
                As I say, it has been agreed that they did
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 58 of 92
not intend to do anything wrong in the
                sense that they were willingly and
                knowingly sending these goods to an
                enemy destination; but they committed a
                breach of the law, and for that breach of
                the law, they were fined. That, as it seems
                to me, was not a loss connected with the
                business, but was a fine imposed upon the
                company personally, so far as a company
                can be considered to be a person, for a
                breach of the law which it had committed.
                It is perhaps a little difficult to put the
                distinction into very exact language, but
                there seems to me to be a difference
                between a commercial loss in trading and
                a penalty imposed upon a person or a
                company for a breach of the law which
                they have committed in that trading. For
                that reason I think that both the decision
                of Rowlatt, J., in this case, and his former
                decision           in
Inland        Revenue
                Commissioners v. Warnes & Co.
[(1919) 2
                KB 444] which he followed were right, and
                that this appeal should be dismissed with
                costs.”


       In Spofforth and Prince v. Glider [(1945) 26 TC 310] the
       assessee was a firm of chartered accountants, who
       claimed a deduction for certain legal costs paid in
       connection with a successful defence of one of the
       partners in a Police Court. The assessee Firm also
       sought legal advice in regard to matters connected
       with some proceedings. Summons were issued against
       the assessee firm but were eventually dismissed. The
       assessee contended that the whole of the costs
       incurred in connection with the proceedings were
       “wholly and exclusively” laid out or expended for the
       appellant's profession and were therefore allowable
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 59 of 92
deductions. The Special Commissioner had held against
       the assessee which was upheld by the Court.
The test
       laid    down     by     Lord    Davey     in Strong   &
       Co. v. Woodifield [(1906) AC 448] was applied and
       applying that test it was held that except the expenses
       for obtaining legal advice the other expenses were not
       admissible.
In Farrie v. Hall [(1947) 28 TC 200] F, a sugar
       broker was sued in the High Court for libel and the
       Court held that F had acted maliciously and that the
       defence of privilege could not prevail and awarded
       damages against him. F sought to claim the amount of
       damages as an allowable deduction contending that it
       was an expenditure laid out wholly and exclusively for
       the purposes of his trade or was a loss connected with
       or arising out of the trade. Relying on the cases
       abovementioned this amount was disallowed because it
       fell on the assessee in his character of a calumniator of
       a rival sugar broker and it was only remotely connected
       with his trade as a sugar broker. Therefore it was not
       laid out exclusively and wholly for the purpose of his
       business. We were also referred to the observations of
       Danckwerts, J. in Newson v. Robertson [(1952) 33 TC
       452 at p. 459] where it was said that if the expenditure
       is incurred by the tax-payer for more than one purpose
       including the commercial purposes in the sense that it
       is incurred for the purposes of earning profits of the
       trade and also some outside purpose then the
       expenses cannot be claimed at all as not being wholly
       and exclusively laid out or expended for the purpose of
       the trade. In that case expenses claimed by a Barrister
       for travelling between his house and his chambers
       were disallowed because his object and purpose in
       travelling was mixed and not wholly and exclusively for
       the purpose of the profession.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 60 of 92
Coming now to Indian cases; In
Mask &
       Co. v. Commissioner of Income-tax, Madras
[(1943) 11
       ITR 454] the assessee in breach of his contract sold
       crackers at a lower rate and a decree was passed
       against him for damages for breach of contract which
       he claimed as an allowable deduction. It was held that
       as the assessee had disregarded the undertaking given
       and his conduct was palpably dishonest it did not
       constitute an allowable expenditure. Sir Lionel Leach,
       C.J., after referring to Warne’s case [(1919) 2 KB 444]
       and Von Glehn’s case [(1920) 2 KB 553] held that the
       amount did not constitute an expenditure falling within
Section     10(2)(xii)
.
The    Madras    High   Court
       in
Senthikumara Nadar & Sons v. Commissioner of
       Income-tax
(1957) 32 ITR 138] held that payments of
       penalty for an infraction of the law fell outside the
       scope of permissible deductions under
s. 10(2)(xv)
. In
       that case the assessee had to pay liquidated damages
       which was akin to penalty incurred for an act opposed
       to public policy a policy underlying the Coffee Market
       Expansion Act, 1942, and which was left to the Coffee
       Board to enforce.
Reference was also made during the course of
       arguments         to Commissioner      of      Income-
       tax v. Hirjee [(1953) SCR 714].    In that case the
       assessee was prosecuted under the Hoarding and
       Profiteering Ordinance but was finally acquitted and
       claimed the amount spent in defending himself under
       s. 10(2)(xv) in his assessment. It was held that the
       distinction between the legal expenses on a successful
       and unsuccessful defence was not sound and that the
       deductibility of such expenses under
s. 10(2)(xv)
must
       depend on the nature and purpose of the legal
       proceedings in relation to the business whose profits
       are in computation and are unaffected by the final
       outcome of the proceedings.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 61 of 92
A review of these cases shows that expenses
       which are permitted as deductions are such as are
       made for the purpose of carrying on the business i.e. to
       enable a person to carry on and earn profit in that
       business. It is not enough that the disbursements are
       made in the course of or arise out of or are concerned
       with or made out of the profits of the business but they
       must also be for the purpose of earning the profits of
       the business. As was pointed out in Von Glehn’s case
       [(1920) 2 KB 553] an expenditure is not deductible
       unless it is a commercial loss in trade and a penalty
       imposed for breach of the law during the course of
       trade cannot be described as such. If a sum is paid by
       an assessee conducting his business, because in
       conducting it he has acted in a manner, which has
       rendered him liable to penalty it cannot be claimed as
       a deductible expense. It must be a commercial loss and
       in its nature must be contemplable as such. Such
       penalties which are incurred by an assessee in
       proceedings launched against him for an infraction of
       the law cannot be called commercial losses incurred by
       an assessee in carrying on his business. Infraction of
       the law is not a normal incident of business and
       therefore only such disbursements can be deducted as
       are really incidental to the business itself. They cannot
       be deducted if they fall on the assessee in some
       character other than that of a trader. Therefore where
       a penalty is incurred for the contravention of any
       specific statutory provision, it cannot be said to be a
       commercial loss falling on the assessee as a trader the
       test being that the expenses which are for the purpose
       of enabling a person to carry on trade for making
       profits in the business are permitted but not if they are
       merely connected with the business.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 62 of 92
It was argued that unless the penalty is of a
       nature which is personal to the assessee and if it is
       merely ordered against the goods imported it is an
       allowable deduction. That, in our opinion, is an
       erroneous     distinction     because   disbursement    is
       deductible only if it falls within
s. 10(2)(xv)
of the
       Income-tax Act and no such deduction can be made
       unless it falls within the test
laid down in
the cases
       discussed above and it can be said to be expenditure
       wholly and exclusively laid for the purpose of the
       business. Can it be said that a penalty paid for an
       infraction of the law, even though it may involve no
       personal liability in the sense of a fine imposed for an
       offence committed, is wholly and exclusively laid for
       the business in the sense as those words are used in
       the cases that have been discussed above. In our
       opinion, no expense which is paid by way of penalty for
       a breach of the law can be said to be an amount wholly
       and exclusively laid for the purpose of the business.
       The distinction sought to be drawn between a personal
       liability and a liability of the kind now before us is not
       sustainable because anything done which is an
       infraction of the law and is visited with a penalty
       cannot on grounds of public policy be said to be a
       commercial expense for the purpose of a business or a
       disbursement made for the purposes of earning the
       profits of such business.”
21.
CIT v. S.C. Kothari
, 1972 (4) SCC 402



   21.1 The decision rendered in
Badridas Daga
(supra) was quoted with approval. However, it
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 63 of 92
was the view expressed that if the profit is to be

   taken       for    the    taxable     income,        a     resultant

   expenditure/loss                 cannot     be              avoided,

   notwithstanding the nature of business.
We must

   hasten to note that the decision rendered in
S.C.

   Kothari
(supra)       may     not   be   in       tune    with
Badridas Daga
(supra) wherein this Court held

   that allowing a deduction depends upon the

   statute and commercial principles, while applying

   the test of ‘purpose of business’ and ‘incidental to

   business’ and not by way of a general principle.
Hence, non-allowance of a deduction on the

   ground of one incurred as an expenditure for a

   purpose which is an offence or prohibited by law

   can be disallowed otherwise through a statute.
This Court in
SC Kothari
(supra) had merely laid

   down the general proposition of law by taking note
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                           Page 64 of 92
of the position prevailing in other countries, but in

   any case, it has got no application over a case of

   either a penalty or confiscation.
21.2 The law as
laid down in
Haji Aziz (supra)

   despite being noted, was not followed on both the

   counts, viz., the deduction of loss qua an offence

   and the consequence of a penalty imposed for an

   infraction of law.
21.3 We must further add that in
S.C. Kothari
(supra), this Court was concerned with
Section

   10(2)(xv)
of the Old Act, which did not contain any

   explanation as introduced to
Section 37(1)
of the

   Act. This subsequent change in law will certainly

   have a bearing on the understanding of
the said

   judgment
.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023           Page 65 of 92
22.
Soni Hinduji Kushalji & Co. v. CIT
,

       (1971) SCC Online AP 223



22.1 The Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High

     Court considered the law laid down on deduction

     of loss incurred by way of a confiscation and

     penalty.
It took into consideration the decision of

     this Court in
S.C. Kothari
(Supra).
It was

     accordingly held that a loss must be one arising

     directly     from      the     business   or   trade,      being

     incidental to it, as
laid down by
this Court in
Badridas Daga
(supra).
The Court while noting

     the     decision       of      this   Court    in
Maqbool

     Hussain v. State of Bombay
etc., (1953) SCR
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 66 of 92
730      and     Haji     Aziz   (supra),     held     that   a

     confiscation of a contraband being an action in

     rem is not available for deduction, as the same,

     by no process of reasoning can be said to be

     trading or commercial loss connected with or

     incidental to the assessee's business.
22.2 Relevant paragraphs:
“4. Mr. Swamy appearing for the assessee-firm strongly
       contended that when the profits earned from an illegal
       business are not exempt from tax, the loss sustained in
       such business should be allowed to be deducted from
       the profits or gains for purposes of computing the tax
       payable by the assessee.
5. What are chargeable to tax in respect of a business
       carried on by the assessee are the profits or gains of a
       particular assessment year. While assessing the profits,
       necessarily loss incurred in the business during the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 67 of 92
year should be taken into account, as otherwise it is
       not possible to arrive at the true profits earned by the
       assessee. It is well-settled that the taint of illegality
       associated with profits or income is immaterial for the
       purpose of taxation. As observed by Lord Haldane in
       Minister of Finance v. Smith [[1927] A.C. 193, 198.] ,
       Income-tax Acts are not necessarily restricted in their
       application to lawful business only. One who
       contravenes a statute and trades in business prohibited
       by law while being liable for prosecution for the offence
       committed by him will, at the same time, be liable to
       pay tax out of the income or profits earned from the
       illegal trade or business. We are now concerned with
       the loss representing the value of gold on account of
       the confiscation of the gold for contravention of the
       provisions of the
Customs Act
. Can that loss be
       regarded as a commercial loss pertaining to the
       business or incidental to the business the assessee was
       carrying on, is the real question.
6. Mr. Swamy sought to place strong reliance upon a
       decision of the Gujarat High Court in
Commissioner of
       Income-tax v. S.C. Kothari
[[1968] 69 I.T.R. 1 (Guj.).] to
       contend that the assessee is entitled to claim
       deduction of the value of the contraband gold
       confiscated by the customs authorities, as it
       represented the loss sustained by the firm in the illegal
       business carried on by it. The learned judges
in that
       case
were of the view that, when illegal business is
       business within the meaning of the
Income-tax Act
and
       if profits from illegal business are assessable to tax,
       there is no reason either in principle or on authority for
       refusing to take into account losses from illegal
       business.
According to these, the losses so incurred
       must necessarily be taken into account in order to
       arrive at the true profits of the business and such
       profits may be either positive in the sense that they are
       actual profits or they may be negative in the sense that
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 68 of 92
they are losses and there is in principle no distinction
       between profits and losses of a business…
                  xxx                xxx          xxx
9.Kothari
's case [[1968] 69 I.T.R. 1 (Guj.).] , as may be
       noticed from the facts stated therein, was not a case
       where a claim for deduction was made by the assessee,
       as he did not say that a particular expenditure incurred
       by him should be allowed as a permissible deduction.
It
       is on that ground that the learned judges ruled that the
       decision in
Commissioner of Income-tax v. Haji Aziz &
       Abdul Shakoor Bros
[[1955] 28 I.T.R. 266 (Bom.).] .,
       relied upon by the revenue, where the claim for
       deduction under
section 10(2)(xv)
of the 1922 Act was
       negatived, was not applicable to the case before them.
Therefore, the answers given by the learned judges
       in
Kothari
's case [[1968] 69 I.T.R. 1 (Guj.).] render no
       assistance at all to the assessee's contention.
10. Here is a specific claim made by the assessee for
       deduction of the value of the gold confiscated by the
       Central Government on the ground that it is a trading
       or commercial loss, though the trade was an illegal
       one. It should not be lost sight of when a claim for
       deduction is made, that the loss must be one that
       springs directly from the business or trade which the
       assessee carries on or is incidental to the business that
       he carries on and not every sort or kind of loss, which
       has absolutely no nexus or connection with his trade or
       business.
11. It is well to remember that confiscation of
       contraband gold is an action in rem and not a
       proceeding in personam. As observed by Bhagwati J. in
Maqbool Hussain v. State of Bombay
[[1953] S.C.R.
       730, 742 (S.C.), AIR 1953 S.C. 325.] confiscation is no
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 69 of 92
doubt one of the penalties which the customs
       authorities can impose but that is more in the nature of
       proceedings in rem than proceedings in personam, the
       object being to confiscate the offending goods which
       have been dealt with contrary to the provisions of the
       law.
To the same effect is the view expressed by S.K.
       Das J. in Shewpujanrai Indrasanrai Ltd. v. Collector of
       Customs [[1959] S.C.R. 821, 836 (S.C.), AIR 1958 S.C.
845.] that, so far as the confiscation of the goods is
       concerned, it is a proceeding in rem and the penalties
       are enforced against the goods whether the offender is
       known or not known and the order of confiscation
       under section 182 of the Sea Customs Act operates
       directly upon the status of the property and under
section 184
transfers an absolute title to the
       Government. Subba Rao J. (as he then was) in
Thomas
       Dana v. State of Punjab
[AIR 1959 S.C. 375.] , in his
       dissenting judgment (the dissent being on other points)
       observed that if the authority concerned makes an
       order of confiscation it is only a proceeding in rem and
       the penalty is enforced against the goods.
12. A proceeding in rem, therefore, in the strict sense
       of the term is an action taken directly against the
       property (in this case the smuggled gold) and even if
       the offender is not known, the customs authorities have
       the power to confiscate the contraband gold. Therefore,
       by no process of reasoning can the confiscation of the
       contraband gold by the customs authorities be said to
       be a trading or commercial loss connected with or
       incidental to the assessee's business.
13. In Commissioners of Inland Revenue v. Alexander
       Von Glehn & Co. Ltd. [[1920] 2 K.B. 553, 566 (C.A.).] .
       Lord Sterndale M.R. observed:
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 70 of 92
“During the course of the trading this
                company committed a breach of the law.
                As I say, it has been agreed that they did
                not intend to do anything wrong in the
                sense that they were willingly and
                knowingly sending these goods to an
                enemy destination, but they committed a
                breach of the law, and for that breach of
                the law, they were fined. That, as it seems
                to me, was not a loss connected with the
                business, but was a fine imposed upon the
                company personally, so far as a company
                can be considered to be a person, for a
                breach of the law which it had committed.
                It is perhaps a little difficult to put the
                distinction into very exact language, but
                there seems to me to be a difference
                between a commercial loss in trading and
                a penalty imposed upon a person or a
                company for a breach of the law which
                they have committed in that trading.”
14. The principle stated by Lord Sterndale M.R. holds
       good here too, as it is impossible to hold that the loss
       incurred by reason of the confiscation of the
       contraband gold is an expenditure incurred in
       connection with the trade or business of the assessee-
       firm or incidental to the carrying on of its business.
xxx                 xxx           xxx
16. Their Lordships of the Supreme Court in Haji Aziz and
       Abdul      Shakoor    Bros. v. Commissioner    of   Income-
       tax [[1961] 41 I.T.R. 350 (S.C.), [1961] 2 S.C.R. 651
       (S.C.).] , after reviewing several Indian and English cases,
       observed at page 359:
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 71 of 92
“As was pointed out in Von Glehn's
                case [[1920] 2 K.B. 553 (C.A.).] , an
                expenditure is not deductible unless it is a
                commercial loss in trade and penalty
                imposed for breach of the law during the
                course of trade cannot be described as such.
                If a sum is paid by an assessee conducting
                his business, because in conducting it he has
                acted in a manner which has rendered him
                liable to penalty, it cannot be claimed as a
                deductible expense. It must be a commercial
                loss and in its nature must be contemplable
                as such. Such penalties which are incurred
                by an assessee in proceedings launched
                against him for an infraction of the law
                cannot be called commercial losses incurred
                by an assessee in carrying on his business.
                Infraction of the law is not a normal incident
                of business and, therefore only such
                disbursements can be deducted as are really
                incidental to the business itself. They cannot
                be deducted if they fall on the assessee in
                some character other than that of a trader.
                Therefore, where a penalty is incurred for
                the contravention of any specific statutory
                provision, it cannot be said to be a
                commercial loss falling on the assessee as a
                trader, the test being that the expenses
                which are for the purpose of enabling a
                person to carry on trade for making profits in
                the business are permitted but not if they
                are merely connected with the business….
                Anything done which is an infraction of the
                law and is visited with a penalty cannot on
                grounds of public policy be said to be a
                commercial expense for the purpose of a
                business or a disbursement made for the
                purposes of earning the profits of such
                business.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                         Page 72 of 92
17. Similar views have been expressed by the Punjab
       and       Allahabad     High   Courts   in
Raj Woollen
       Industries v. Commissioner of Income-tax
[[1961] 43
       I.T.R.     36   (Punj.).]  , Commissioner   of Income-
       tax v. Mathura Prasad Hardwar Prasad Deoria [[1965]
       55 I.T.R. 476 (All.).] and Mahabir Sugar Mills (P.)
Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income-tax
[[1969] 71 I.T.R. 87
       (All.).] .
18. The Supreme Court in
Badridas v. Commissioner of
       Income-tax
[[1958] 34 I.T.R. 10, [1959] S.C.R. 690
       (S.C.).] , considered what would amount to a trading
       loss. Venkatarama Aiyar J. observed:
“When a claim is made for a deduction for
                which there is no specific provision in
section 10(2)
, whether it is admissible or
                not will depend on whether, having regard
                to accepted commercial pratice and
                trading principles, it can be said to arise
                out of the carrying on of the business and
                to be incidental to it. If that is established,
                then the deduction must be allowed,
                provided of course there is no prohibition
                against it, express or implied in the Act.
                The loss for which a deduction could be
                made under
section 10(1)
must be one
                that springs directly from the carrying on
                of the business and is incidental to it, and
                not any loss sustained by the assessee,
                even if it has some connection with his
                business.”
19. Judged from the test
laid down by
their Lordships, it
       is impossible to hold that the confiscation of
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 73 of 92
contraband gold, which is in the nature of a proceeding
       in rem, is a loss that springs directly from the business
       or trade carried on by the assessee-firm and is
       incidental to its business.
Following the view expressed
       by their Lordships, the Punjab High Court in
Ram Gopal
       Ram Sarup v. Commissioner of Income-tax
[[1963] 47
       I.T.R. 611 (Punj.).] , held that the mere fact that there is
       some remote connection between a loss and the
       business would not bring the loss within the expression
       “loss incidental to the the”.
xxx                 xxx           xxx
22. As pointed out by Lord Loreburn L.C. in Strong &
       Co. Ltd. v. Woodi-field [[1906] A.C. 448, 452 (H.L.).] ,
       “They cannot be deducted if they are mainly incidental
       to some other vocation or fall on the trader in some
       character other than that of trader. The nature of the
       trade is to be considered.”
23. This court in
Commissioner of Income-tax v. Chakka
       Narayana
[[1961] 43 I.T.R. 249 (A.P.).] , in a case of
       loss sustained by an assessee on account of theft at a
       railway station, held that the loss resulting thereof was
       not incidental to the assessee's business and was not
       an allowable deduction and that the mere fact that
       there was some remote connection between the loss
       and the business would not bring the loss within the
       expression “loss incidental to the the”. The loss
       sustained by confiscation of the smuggled gold is
       absolutely foreign to the vocation or business of the
       assessee-firm. It is a loss incurred in some character
       other than that of a trader. The confiscation of the gold,
       being the result of a proceeding in rem, falls
       completely outside the trade or business which the
       assessee was carrying on. Confiscation of contraband
       goods is one of the penalties provided under the Sea
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 74 of 92
Customs Act
and the penalty is enforced against the
       goods irrespective of the fact whether the offender is
       known or not traced. Infraction or violation of the law is
       not a normal incident of a trade or business and,
       therefore, the penalty by way of confiscation of the
       contraband gold is not a commercial loss so as to be
       allowed as a permissible deduction.”



22.3 The aforesaid reasoning of the Andhra Pradesh

     High Court arrived at after taking note of the

     earlier decisions rendered by this Court in its

     support, deserves to be approved.
23.
J.S Parkar v. V.B Palekar and Others
,

       (1973) SCC Online Bom 161



       23.1.
Majority view of the Bombay High Court

       was in line with Soni Hinduji Kushalji & Co.
(supra),       though        not referring     to
the    said

       decision
. It is to be noted that though Justice

       Mukhi      dissented         with   the   view      of   Justice
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 75 of 92
Deshpande, the third Judge, Justice Tulzapurkar

       by a separate judgment, concurred with the

       view     of    Justice       Deshpande.
Therefore,    the

       majority while broadly interpreting the view of

       this Court in
Haji Aziz
(supra), held that

       confiscation of goods incurred for infraction of

       law cannot be said to be a normal incident of

       business, and this loss falls on the assessee in

       some character other than that of a trader.
The

       Court further noted that this principle would

       equally apply to a case where the business itself

       is prohibited by law, while disagreeing with the

       view of the Punjab and Haryana High Court in
Piara Singh
(supra), which decision did not

       reach this Court at that point of time.
The Court

       held that the decision of the Punjab and Haryana

       High Court in
Piara Singh
(supra) was not in
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                    Page 76 of 92
line with the decision of this Court in
Haji

       Aziz
(supra).
23.2.Relevant paragraphs:
Justice Deshpande:
“23. It is then contended that, admittedly, the entire
       gold has been confiscated by the customs department
       and, as such, value of this should have been treated as
       a trading loss and the assessee was entitled to a set-off
       of this loss against his assumed and assessed income
       from undisclosed sources. Reliance was mainly placed
       on
section 71
, though faintly
section 70
was also
       referred to. This point was raised before the Tribunal.
       The Tribunal, however, declined to entertain this plea,
       as it was raised for the first time before it and it
       thought that the same cannot be adjudicated without
       investigation of further facts. Unfortunately, the order
       of the Tribunal is not explicit as to in what manner
       investigation of further facts was necessary. It is,
       therefore, not possible to know if the Tribunal was
       reluctant to allow set off for loss tainted with patent
       illegality, against the income, source of which was not
       shown to be illegal or it treated the loss by confiscation
       as capital loss and, therefore, was reluctant to deduct
       the same from the income from capital gains as
       required under
section 71
. Be that as it may, I have no
       hesitation in saying that if it were a pure question of
       law capable of being adjudged on the material on
       record, the Tribunal was under a statutory obligation to
       entertain and decide the same. I, however, think that,
       on the admitted facts, the petitioner is not entitled to
       claim any set-off. The loss suffered by the assessee
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 77 of 92
consequent on the confiscation of the gold for
       infraction of law cannot be said to be a commercial loss
       liable to set off under any provision of the Act. It will be
       enough to refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court
       in Haji Aziz and Abdul Shakoor Bros. v. Commissioner of
       Income-tax. The Supreme Court upheld the view of this
       court in the same case. Dates were imported from
       abroad by the assessee in contravention of the
       provisions of the Sea Customs Act. The customs
       authorities confiscated the goods under section 167-B
       of the Sea Customs Act. It, however, gave the
       assessee, under
section 183
of the Act, an option to
       pay the fine in lieu of confiscation and get the goods
       released. The assessee exercised the option and got
       the goods released on payment of fine. In the course of
       the assessment proceedings the assessee claimed
       deduction of this penalty amount under
section 10(2)
(xv) of the
Indian Income-tax Act
of 1922. The Bombay
       High Court negatived the claim holding that the penalty
       for infraction of law does not amount to any
       expenditure laid out or expended wholly and
       exclusively for the purpose of such business, profession
       or vocation. The Supreme Court affirmed the said view
       of this court on slightly broader base, observing as
       follows:
“An expenditure is not deductible unless it
                is a commercial loss in trade and a penalty
                imposed for breach of the law during the
                course of trade cannot be described as
                such. Infraction of the law is not a normal
                incident of business and, therefore, only
                such disbursements can be deducted as
                are really incidental to the business itself.
                They cannot be deducted if they fall on the
                assessee in some character other than
                that of a trader.”
                  xxx                 xxx           xxx
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 78 of 92
“29. Applying this test
laid down by
Grover J., speaking
       for the Supreme Court, in
S.C. Kothari
's case and the
       test
laid down by
Kapur J., speaking for the Supreme
       Court, in the case of Haji Aziz and Abdul Shakoor Bros.,
       it shall have to be held that confiscation of goods
       incurred for infraction of law cannot be said to be a
       normal incident of business and loss suffered therefrom
       falls on the assessee in some character other than that
       of a trader. It is not possible to see how this principle
       can make any difference where the business itself is
       found to have been prohibited by the law. It is the
       commercial profit that is taxable and it is the
       commercial loss in trade in regard to which deduction
       can be claimed either because it goes to lessen the
       amount of profits before the quantum of net profit is
       determined or because the expenses are required to be
       incurred for the purposes of running the said business
       or because losses are incurred under some other
       sources of business under the same head or they are
       incurred while carrying on business or vocation under
       some other head. Penalty and confiscation of goods
       even when incurred or suffered in the course of
       prohibited trade or business still cannot be said to be
       the normal incident even of such unlawful business and
       the loss so suffered can still be not said to be a
       commercial loss in the trade for the same reason as
       gains of theft, dacoity, misappropriation or cheating
       cannot be treated as taxable income from any business
       or commerce. The claim of Mr. Albal for deduction of
       value of gold confiscated by way of set-off cannot,
       therefore, be entertained.
30. It is true, as observed by the Punjab and Haryana
       High Court in
Piara Singh
's case, the risk of confiscation
       of goods and incurring of penalties is inherent in any
       unlawful trading or business. So is the risk of conviction
       and fine. It does not, however, necessarily follow that
       every kind of damage suffered in such trading falls
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 79 of 92
under the category of commercial loss. It shall have to
       be held, at any rate, on the authority of the Supreme
       Court in Haji Aziz and Abdul Shakoor Bros. that the
       confiscation of property or penalty incurred while
       indulging in prohibited trading activities does not
       amount to commercial loss though it happens in fact to
       be a loss according to the ordinary meaning of the
       word “loss” as understood in common parlance.
Attempt to distinguish the above Supreme Court
       judgment on the ground that the court was dealing
       with the claim of the assessee for deduction of penalty
       under
section 10(2)(xv)
and not under
section 10(1)
of
       the Income-tax Act of 1922 is an exercise in futility.
       That
,
in
the above case
, neither the assessee claimed
       deduction of such penalty by way of loss under
section
       10(1)
of the Act, nor the Supreme Court considered it
       worthwhile allowing the claim under that sub-section is
       also indicative, if not decisive, of the untenability of
       such contention. Though deduction was claimed under
section 10(1)
of the Act, rejection of the claim is based
       on the broader basis that penalties and confiscations
       are not the normal incidents of business and do not
       constitute commercial loss. If one examines the
       scheme of
section 10(2)
, and
section 24
of the 1922
       Act and corresponding provisions of
sections 28
,
29
to
44A
and
sections 70
and
71
of the 1961 Act, it will be
       noticed that the provisions deal with the deductions or
       disbursement from the profits earned under various
       contingencies. If the losses are incurred in the same
       business (source of income) under the same head
       enumerated under
section 14
, the same are liable to be
       deducted under
section 22
(
section 10(1)
of the old
       Act) of the Act. If losses are incurred under a different
       source falling under the same head, the losses are
       liable to be deducted from the income of any other
       source falling under the same head under
section 70
.
       When, however, net result of all sources under any one
       head of income is loss, the same is liable to be
       deducted from the income under another head under
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 80 of 92
section 71
. If the net result of all sources under all
       heads is a loss, the same can be carried forward under
section 72
of the Act.
Sections 29
to
44A
corresponding
       to
section 10(2)
, clauses (1) to (xvi), deal with
       deductions or disbursements by way of expenses, etc.
       These provisions deal with the mode of determining the
       net taxable profits or income of the assessee. If the
       true ratio of the Supreme Court judgment is that
       penalty incurred by infraction of law is not a
       commercial loss as it is not incidental to trade or
       business, it matters little as to under what count the
       deduction or set-off is claimed. That the margin
       between what is and what is not incidental is very thin
       has been noticed by the learned judges of the Supreme
       Court themselves. Ratio of this judgment is applicable
       to all contingencies where such non-commercial loss is
       sought to be deducted on any count whatsoever. That
       the assessee
in that case
claimed deduction of penalty
       under
section 10(2)(xv)
cannot make any difference to
       the ratio of the case. I do not find it possible to agree
       with the view of the Punjab High Court. I do not think
       that the Gujarat High Court's judgment in Kothari's
       case supports its view. On the contrary, the ratio of the
       two Supreme Court judgments run counter to the ratio
       of the Punjab case.”




   Justice Tulzapurkar:
“179. I have already indicated above that in Haji Aziz's
       case1 while dealing with penalty or fine imposed in lieu
       of confiscation of goods, the Supreme Court has
       observed that the penalty suffered by an assessee for
       an infraction of law cannot be regarded as incidental to
       the business and in fact it falls upon the assessee in
       some character other than that of a trader. In my view,
       the aforesaid authorities make the position very clear
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                       Page 81 of 92
that before any loss could be claimed as deductible loss
       under
section 10(1)
of the Act, it must be a trading loss
       or commercial loss arising out of carrying on business
       or it must be incidental to the business and such loss
       must also fall on the assessee in his character as a
       trader. The question in the present case is as to
       whether the loss consequent upon confiscation of
       goods for an infraction of law suffered by the assessee
       could be regarded as a commercial loss or could it be
       said to be loss incidental to the business and, what is of
       importance, could it be said to have been suffered by
       him in his character as a trader? In my view, it is
       certainly not a commercial loss arising from carrying on
       of the business nor can it be regarded as incidental to
       the activity of the assessee as dealer in gold;
       moreover, it cannot be regarded as loss falling upon
       the assessee in his character as a trader. It is a loss
       falling upon him as a person who had infracted law. The
       loss suffered by confiscation of goods directly sprang
       from an illegal act committed by the assessee, namely,
       having acquired gold without requisite permit or
       permission of the Reserve Bank of India and without
       having paid any duty for the import thereof into India.
       Surely, the loss has not fallen on the assessee as a
       trader or businessman, for, obviously, even a lay
       person who is not a businessman, if he were to import
       gold for his private use without requisite permission
       and without payment of customs duty, would subject
       himself to the penalty of having that gold confiscated
       from him and he would as a consequence suffer great
       loss. It is thus clear that the loss consequent upon
       confiscation of goods for infraction of law suffered by
       the assessee must be regarded as loss falling upon him
       in some character other than a trader. In this view of
       the matter, I am clearly of the view that the petitioner
       is not entitled to claim the loss suffered by him as a
       result of confiscation of the gold in question as
       allowable deduction while computing his business
       income under
section 28
of the Act.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                        Page 82 of 92
180. So far as the decision of the Gujarat High Court
       in
S.C. Kothari
's case is concerned—which decision has
       been confirmed by the Supreme Court— it must be
       observed that the judgment is an authority only for the
       proposition that illegality of any business is irrelevant
       for the purpose of computing the net income thereof
       under the
Income-tax Act
and while the revenue is
       entitled to levy tax on the income of the assessee
       earned even from unlawful business, the assessee is
       also entitled to insist on deduction of loss arising out of
       such unlawful business. There could be no quarrel with
       this statement of law which has been approved by the
       Supreme Court. But even there, the loss in respect of
       which deduction could be claimed while computing the
       profits of the unlawful business must be a trade loss or
       commercial loss or loss incidental thereto but suffered
       by the assessee in his character as a trader and not
       loss suffered as a result of confiscation of goods for an
       infraction of law which would be a loss suffered by him
       in some capacity other than as a trader.
Besides,
       in
S.C. Kothari
's case neither the Gujarat High Court nor
       the Supreme Court had to consider the question
       whether the loss suffered by way of penalty or
       confiscation of goods amounted to commercial loss or
       not. In fact, while setting out the facts of the case it has
       been stated by the Supreme Court in paragraph 1 of its
       judgment that the loss of Rs. 3,40,000 and odd which
       was claimed as deductible loss had arisen out of certain
       transactions entered into by the assessee with different
       people for the supply of groundnut oil and it was
       expected by the assessee that those contracts would
       be performed but owing to certain reasons some of the
       contracts could not be performed and difference has to
       be paid.
From this it appears clear that the loss of Rs.
3,40,000 which was claimed as deductible loss was
       clearly in the nature of commercial or trade loss for
       which deduction was claimed under
section 10(1)
of
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                          Page 83 of 92
the Act. In the circumstances, it is clear that the
       statement of law enunciated in the case of S.C.
       Kothari is unexceptionable but, with respect, I would
       like to point out that the decision is no authority for the
       proposition that the loss suffered by way of penalty or
       confiscation of goods amounts to commercial loss that
       could be deducted while computing the net profits of a
       business under
section 10(1)
of the Act. It is true that
       in
Piara Singh
's case, the Punjab and Haryana High
       Court has taken the view that the confiscation of cash
       amount of Rs. 65,500 from the assessee, who was
       engaged in the business activity of smuggling gold,
       amounted to trade loss and hence was deductible
       under
section 10(1)
of the Act.
But for coming to that
       conclusion the Punjab High Court has principally relied
       upon the decision of the Gujarat High Court and of the
       Supreme Court in
S.C. Kothari
's case, in which, as I
       have stated above, neither the Gujarat High Court nor
       the Supreme Court was required to consider the
       question whether the loss arising from penalty or
       confiscation of goods for an infraction of law amounted
       to trade loss or commercial loss; in fact admittedly the
       nature of loss suffered by the assessee was commercial
       since it had arisen on account of payment of
       differences.
With great deference, I am unable to
       persuade myself to agree with the view of the Punjab
       High Court expressed in
Piara Singh
's case, especially
       when it runs counter to the tests
laid down by
the
       Supreme Court in
Haji Aziz
's case and in English cases
       to which the Supreme Court has referred while
       deciding
Haji Aziz
's case. The other contention that this
       loss should be allowed to be set off against the income
       from undisclosed source under
section 70
or
section 71
was not pressed by Mr. Albal.
In view of the above
       discussion, on both the points on which there was
       difference of opinion between the two learned judges I
       am in agreement with the views expressed by Mr.
       Justice Deshpande.”
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                         Page 84 of 92
23.3 The decision of the Bombay High Court

       certainly falls in line with the one rendered in
Haji Aziz
(supra). The cogent reasons given by

       taking penalty and confiscation out of the

       purview of
Section 10(1)
of the Old Act appears

       to be the correct view.
24.
Commissioner of Income Tax v. Piara

       Singh
, (1980) Supp.
SCC 166




24.1 This Court did not differ with the view expressed

 by a co-ordinate bench in
Haji Aziz
(supra). In fact,

 it gave its approval to
the said decision
.
However,

 reliance was placed on
S.C. Kothari
(supra) by

 drawing a distinction between an infraction of law
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023           Page 85 of 92
committed in carrying out a lawful business, as

 against one committed in an inherently unlawful

 business. It was done upon a legitimate anticipation

 that in an illegal business there will be many pitfalls

 resulting in expected loss, which cannot be factored

 into a normal business.
24.2 Law as
laid down in
Haji Aziz
(supra) on both

     the issues have not been taken note of by

     inadvertence,           particularly    the     nature      of

     proceedings         involved    in     the    imposition    of

     confiscation or penalty, being proceedings in rem.
This Court did not have the benefit of the

     explanation as available under
Section 37
of the

     Act, while interpreting
Section 10(2)
of the Old

     Act, apart from ignoring the word of caution

     mentioned in
Badridas Daga
(supra).
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 86 of 92
24.3 We would only clarify the position that, in any

     case, the law as
laid down in
Piara Singh
(supra) may not have any application to a case

     of deduction of expenditure/loss incurred on

     account of penalty/confiscation coming under
Section 37(1)
of the Act, particularly in light of

     Explanation 1.
25.
Dr. T.A. Quereshi v. Commissioner of Income

   Tax, Bhopal
(2007) 2 SCC 759



       25.1.
This Court merely followed
Piara Singh
(supra) while making a casual observation on

       Explanation 1 to
Section 37
of the Act.
The

       earlier decisions have not been taken into

       consideration as we could see in
Piara Singh
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023           Page 87 of 92
(supra), but the principle laid down was also

       not taken note of. In this connection, it has to be

       remembered that for a precedent to be binding

       there has to be a conscious consideration of an

       issue    involved.
The   judgment    in
Dr.    T.A.

       Quereshi
(supra) was delivered by a two-Judge

       Bench while not taking note of a three-Judge

       Bench decision in
Haji Aziz
(supra), which has

       neither been disapproved nor distinguished.
Hence, this decision is per incuriam and not a

       binding precedent. Once again, the question of a

       confiscation proceeding being in rem was not

       brought to the notice of the Court.
25.2. Therefore, there cannot be a situation

       where      an    assessee      carrying   on    an     illegal

       business can claim deduction of expenses or
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 88 of 92
losses incurred in the course of that business,

       while another assessee carrying on a legitimate

       one cannot seek deduction for loss incurred on

       account of either a confiscation or penalty. The

       interpretation of
Section 37
of the Act given by

       the Court in
Dr. T.A. Quereshi
(supra) leads to

       a situation where the expenditure incurred in

       manufacturing something illegal may not be

       allowable       as    a      deduction   in   view   of   the

       Explanation 1, however, if upon seizure, the

       manufactured goods are confiscated
,
in that

       case
deduction will be allowable on commercial

       principles. This classification being artificial not

       borne out by statute, which mischief is sought to

       be clarified by the explanation, has no legal

       basis.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                      Page 89 of 92
Conclusion(s)
26.    On     the     abovesaid     analysis,   the     following

   conclusions are arrived at:
I. The word ‘any expenditure’ mentioned in

            Section 37 of the Act takes in its sweep loss

            occasioned in the course of business, being

            incidental to it.
II. As a consequence, any loss incurred by

            way of an expenditure by an assessee for

            any purpose which is an offence or which is

            prohibited by law is not deductible in terms

            of Explanation 1 to
Section 37
of the Act.
III. Such an expenditure/loss incurred for any

            purpose which is an offence shall not be

            deemed to have been incurred for the
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                     Page 90 of 92
purpose        of       business     or    profession       or

            incidental to it, and hence, no deduction can

            be made.
IV.    A    penalty        or   a    confiscation      is   a

            proceeding in rem, and therefore, a loss in

            pursuance to the same is not available for

            deduction        regardless         of    the   nature      of

            business, as a penalty or confiscation cannot

            be said to be incidental to any business.
V. The decisions of this Court in
Piara

            Singh
(supra) and
Dr. T.A. Quereshi
(supra) do not lay down correct law in light

            of the decision of this Court in
Haji Aziz
(supra) and the insertion of Explanation 1

            to
Section 37
.
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023                           Page 91 of 92
27. In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am

              inclined to hold that the appeal of the

              Revenue deserves to be allowed, though

              conscious of the fact that
Section 115BBE
of the Act may not have an application to

              the case on hand being prospective in

              nature. Accordingly, the judgment & order

              dated 22.11.2016 passed in DBITA No.

              96/2003 & DBITR No. 6/1996 by the High

              Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur stand set aside.
No costs.
……………………………J.
                                      (M.M. SUNDRESH)
New Delhi,
April 24, 2023
Civil Appeal Nos. 7689-90 of 2023              Page 92 of 92