[Cites
1
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The State Of Rajasthan vs Hamir Singh Chouhan (Dead) By Lrs. on 28 April, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE


                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5392 OF 2017


                         State of Rajasthan & Ors.         …Appellant(s)


                                                 Versus


                         Dr. Hamir Singh Chouhan (Dead)
                         by LRs & Ors.                     …Respondent(s)

                                                  WITH


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5393 OF 2017


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5391 OF 2017


                                    CIVIL APPEAL NO. 5394 OF 2017



Signature Not Verified
                                             JUDGMENT
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Date: 2023.04.28
16:27:28 IST
Reason:
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 1 of 14
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.   Feeling    aggrieved   and    dissatisfied   with   the
impugned judgment(s) and order(s) passed by the
Division Bench of the High Court of Judicature for
Rajasthan at Jodhpur in D.B. Civil Special Appeal (Writs)
No. 50 of 2015 and other allied appeals by which the
Division Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said
division appeals preferred by the appellant herein – State
of Rajasthan, which were filed against the common
judgment and order passed by the learned Single Judge
declaring the respondents herein to be entitled to receive
pensionary benefits in essence by treating their lien to be
continuing with the State Government upto the date of
their permanent absorption with the Rajasthan Co-
operative Dairy Federations (hereinafter referred to as
“Dairy Federations”), the State of Rajasthan has preferred
the present appeals.
2.   That the respondents herein were initially appointed
in the Animal Husbandry Department either as Animal
Husbandry Extension Officer or Veterinary Assistant
Surgeon in the year 1971.         That all of them were
subsequently selected after following the due selection
process between 1976 to 1978 in the Dairy Federations.
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 2 of 14
That as per the relevant G.O. and the relevant Rules, the
respondents continued to have the lien with the parent
department / State Government. That the names of the
respondents appeared in the seniority list of the Dairy
Federations and all of them were promoted in the year
1983 or 1989 in the Dairy Federations. All of them retired
as employees of the Dairy Federations between 1999 to
2003. All of them received the retirement benefits from
the Dairy Federations.
2.1   Thereafter, after a period of approximately six to
nine years, from the date of superannuation from the
Dairy Federations and after receiving all the retirement
benefits from the Dairy Federations, the respective
respondents filed the writ petitions before the learned
Single Judge of the High Court claiming the pensionary
benefits from the State Government treating their lien to
be continuing with the State. That the learned Single
Judge allowed the writ petitions.
2.2   At this stage, it is required to be noted that the lien
of the respective respondents came to be terminated
subsequently in the year 1988/1993 w.e.f. the date on
which they were absorbed / made permanent in the Dairy
Federations.
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 3 of 14
2.3   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the judgment
and order passed by the learned Single Judge, the State
preferred the present appeals before the Division Bench.
By the impugned judgment(s) and order(s), the Division
Bench of the High Court has dismissed the said appeals.
Hence the present appeals.
3.    Dr. Manish Singhvi, learned senior counsel has
appeared on behalf of the State and Shri Uday Gupta,
learned counsel has appeared on behalf of the respective
respondents – original writ petitioners.
4.    Dr.   Manish    Singhvi,   learned   senior   counsel
appearing on behalf of the State has vehemently
submitted that all the respective respondents were
selected after following the selection process between
1976 and 1978 in the Dairy Federations. It is submitted
that all of them were absorbed permanently in the Dairy
Federations and they continued to work in the Dairy
Federations as employees of the Dairy Federations till
they attained the age of superannuation and retired.
4.1   It is submitted that as per G.O. dated 30.01.1976,
the respective respondents, who joined the Dairy
Federations, their lien was kept for a period of two years
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 4 of 14
or their confirmation in the Corporation / Union, whichever
is earlier. It is submitted that therefore, on and after they
got confirmed in the Dairy Federations, the respective
respondents were not entitled to have any lien elsewhere.
It is submitted that therefore the lien could not have been
extended beyond a period of two years.
4.2   It is further submitted that therefore, once the
respondents became the employees of the Dairy
Federations, even as per Rule 18(2) of the Rajasthan
Service Rules, 1951, they ceased to have a lien on the
post on which they were earlier working with the State
Government.
4.3   It is submitted that in the case of
State of
Rajasthan and Anr. Vs. S.N. Tiwari and Ors.
, (2009) 4
SCC 700, it has been clearly held that when a person with
a lien against the post is appointed substantively to
another post, then he acquires a lien with the later post. A
person cannot be substantively appointed on two
substantive posts simultaneously. It is submitted that this
is the basis of entire service jurisprudence. It is submitted
that keeping in mind the above, Rule 18(2) of the
Rajasthan    Service   Rules,    1951   provides    that   “a
Government servant’s lien to a post stands terminated on
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 5 of 14
his acquiring a lien on a permanent post, which is outside
the cadre post.”


4.4   Making above submissions, it is submitted that the
respondents shall not be entitled to any pensionary
benefits as Government employees, after they ceased to
have the lien in the State Government on the post on
which they were working earlier.
5.    All these appeals are vehemently opposed by Shri
Uday Gupta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respective respondents.
5.1   Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondents has vehemently submitted that as such the
respective respondents were sent on deputation to the
Dairy Federations and, therefore, they continued to have
the lien in the Government. It is submitted that none of
the respondents had lost their lien in the Government
before their date of absorption / no absorption with the
new employer, i.e., Dairy Federations.
5.2   It is submitted that it is established from the records
that in each of the cases they were all initially appointed
by the Rajasthan Government and were confirmed as
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 6 of 14
such in the Government service, they were then relieved
to join the posting at respective places in the Dairy
Federations.
5.3   It is submitted that the Government of Rajasthan
has referred to the Guidelines contained in the letter /
G.O. dated 30.01.1976 issued by the Deputy Secretary,
Government of Rajasthan, Agriculture Department, Jaipur.
It is submitted that the said document is a letter containing
guidelines issued by an officer of the Department and
these guidelines could not override / supersede the
position of the Rules and, therefore, no reliance can be
placed upon the same.
5.4   It is submitted that so far as the position of the Rules
is concerned, the question of lien has to be decided with
reference to Rules 15 and 18 of the Rajasthan Service
Rules, 1951.    It is submitted that the lien acquired by a
Government servant cannot be terminated even with his
consent if he is left without lien. It is submitted that in the
facts of the present case, the lien acquired by each of the
respondents under the Government could not have come
to an end by their posting and continuance in the
respective Milk Unions until they were absorbed therein.
It is submitted that till the date they were absorbed they
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 7 of 14
continued to be the Government servant and, therefore,
were entitled to the pension according to the Rules. It is
submitted that Rule 158 governs the cases of pension of
those who are working under the Local Bodies and paid
by the Local Funds administered by the Government of
Rajasthan, but so far as the respondents are concerned,
they were continuing as confirmed Government servants
without confirmation in their respective unions and
therefore the guideline dated 30.01.1976 could not
override the operation of the Rules relating to the lien. It
is submitted that the legal position is that the lien could
not be terminated even with the consent of the
Government servant, if he is left without lien.
5.5   Making above submissions, it is prayed to dismiss
the present appeals.
6.    Heard the learned counsel for the respective parties
at length.
7.    At the outset, it is required to be noted and it cannot
be disputed that all the respondents were initially
appointed in the year 1971 on the post of Animal
Husbandry Extension Officer or Veterinary Assistant
Surgeon in the Animal Husbandry Department of the
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 8 of 14
State of Rajasthan.     However, thereafter, all of them
applied for appointment in the Rajasthan State Dairy
Development Corporation Ltd. by making applications and
after they were interviewed, they were appointed in the
respective Milk Unions under the Dairy Federations
between 1976 to 1978.       After their applications and
interviews, the respondents were informed with the terms
and conditions on which they are absorbed / appointed in
the Rajasthan State Dairy Development Corporation Ltd.,
which read as under:-
“With reference to your application and
     interview for the post of Assistant Officer you
     are informed that before the appointment can
     be made your acceptance to the following
     terms and conditions is necessary.
1.    You will be appointed in the grade of
           375-850 and your way will on fined
           suitably protecting your existing pay.
2.    Other     allowances    like    Dearness
           Allowances House Rent allowance and
           Travelling Allowance etc., shall be at par
           with these admissible in State
           Government service.
3.    Though the recruitment is being done by
           the Corporation your ultimate employer
           may be the Union of Cooperative
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 9 of 14
Societies established at the District
               level.
4.     Regarding your previous service the
               matter will have to be settled between
               you and the State Government. So far
               as the Corporation is concerned this will
               be a fresh appointment.
If the terms are acceptable, please send
        the acceptance in the acknowledgement,
        given below latest by 16th August 1975, failing
        which it shall be assumed that you are not
        interested in the job.”

7.1     Thus, all of them were specifically informed that
regarding their previous service, the matter will have to be
settled between them and the State Government and so
far as the Corporation is concerned, the appointment will
be a fresh appointment. That thereafter, all of them were
appointed in the concerned Dairy Federations/Unions
under        the   Rajasthan   State    Dairy    Development
Corporation Ltd. on the basis of the recommendations
made by the selection committee of the Rajasthan State
Dairy Development         Corporation Ltd.      initially on a
probation for a period of one year.        At the time when
number of officers of the Rajasthan Animal Husbandry
Services came to be selected on certain posts in the
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 10 of 14
Rajasthan Dairy Development Corporation and the
various Milk Producers Cooperative Unions, some of
these      officers   workings    in    the    Rajasthan   Animal
Husbandry services represented to the Government that
before making up their mind about accepting of their
offers, they would like to know what benefits in respect of
their service in the Government will be available to them.
To that, the respective employees were informed vide
communication / G.O. dated 30.01.1976 that their lien will
be kept for a period of two years or until their confirmation,
whichever is earlier.        That therefore, right from very
beginning, the respective respondents were told that their
lien will be kept for a period of two years or until their
confirmation in the Corporation / Union, whichever is
earlier.    With an open eye, the respective respondents
accepted their appointments in the Dairy Development
Corporation / Milk Federation Unions.                 All of them
thereafter continued to work in their respective milk unions
under the Dairy Development Corporation. All of them got
the promotions while working in different milk unions
under the Dairy Development Corporation. All of them
retired     as   employees       of    the    Dairy   Development
Corporation / Milk Federation Unions. All of them were
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 11 of 14
paid the retirement benefits when they retired on attaining
the age of superannuation.
That thereafter after a period of six to nine years of
their retirement from the Dairy Development Corporation /
Milk Federation Unions, they filed the writ petitions before
the High Court claiming pensionary benefits from the
State Government contending inter alia that their lien as a
Government servant in the Rajasthan Government service
have been continued.          Once the respondents were
absorbed on selection and after selection process in the
Dairy Development Corporation / Milk Federation Unions,
they worked as such and even got the promotion,
thereafter, the respective respondents ceased to have the
lien in the Government service.            The letter dated
30.01.1976 is very clear.     Even as per Rule 18 of the
Rajasthan Service Rules, 1951, which provides for
termination of lien, “a Government servant’s lien on a post
stands terminated on his acquiring a lien on a permanent
post outside the cadre on which he is borne”. Therefore,
once the respective respondents were appointed after
selection   and   interview     in   the   Rajasthan   Dairy
Development Corporation / Milk Federation Unions, they
ceased to have the lien in the Government.
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 12 of 14
7.2   As rightly submitted on behalf of the State, there
cannot be two liens on two substantive posts.                The
submission on behalf of the respondents that it was not a
case of permanent appointment in the Dairy Development
Corporation    /    Milk   Federation    Unions,    cannot    be
accepted. Their appointment orders on record are very
clear. They were appointed after due selection, interview
and even after following the due selection process and
even earlier when they had doubts, it was made explicitly
clear in the communication dated 30.01.1976. Therefore,
once the respondents were permanently absorbed and
became    an       employee   of   the   Dairy     Development
Corporation / Milk Federation Unions, they ceased to have
the lien with the State Government and therefore, they
shall not be entitled to the pensionary benefits as State
Government employees and that too after having received
the retirement benefits from the Dairy Development
Corporation / Milk Federation Unions.
8.    In view of the above and for the reasons stated
above, the judgment and order passed by the learned
Single Judge as well as the Division Bench are
unsustainable and the same deserve to be quashed and
set aside and are accordingly quashed and set aside. It is
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 13 of 14
observed and held that the respective respondents shall
not be entitled to the pensionary benefits from the State
Government as directed by the learned Single Judge and
the Division Bench.
Present appeals are accordingly allowed. No costs.
     Pending application, if any, also stands disposed of.
………………………………….J.
                             [M.R. SHAH]



NEW DELHI;               ………………………………….J.
APRIL 28, 2023.             [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
Civil Appeal No. 5392 of 2017
Page 14 of 14