[Cites
6
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Shaifuddin (Dead) Thr. Lrs. vs Kanhaiya Lal (Dead) Thr. Lrs . on 24 April, 2023
Author:
Sanjay Karol
Bench:
Sanjay Karol
,
Krishna Murari
1

                                                       NON-REPORTABLE

                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                          CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                         CIVIL APPEAL NO.11040 OF 2013



          SHAIFUDDIN (DEAD) THR. LRS.                   ...APPELLANT

                                      VERSUS

          KANHAIYA LAL (DEAD) THR. LRS. & ORS.          ...RESPONDENTS




                                 JUDGMENT
SANJAY KAROL, J.
1. By way of this appeal, the judgment dated 04.01.2006 in Civil

          Revision No. 715/2002 passed by the High Court of Madhya

          Pradesh, is called into question by the appellants. This order is

          assailed on the ground that the execution application was filed
Signature Not Verified
after 12 years from the date of the decree, and the same was
Digitally signed by
Deepak Singh
Date: 2023.04.24
18:01:56 IST
Reason:
therefore, barred by time. Consequently, it is prayed that the
2
Revisional Court was not justified in dismissing the revision

  petition.
2. The question which arises in this Appeal before us is whether the

  date on which the compromise decree dated 26.04.1960 was

  entered into in Civil First Appeal No.11/1959 or the date when the

  final decree was passed by the Civil Court in Suit No. 30 A/87 i.e.

  31.03.1994, will be considered for establishing the period of

  limitation under the
Limitation Act, 1963
(hereinafter “the Act”) for

  instituting execution proceedings?
3. It is imperative to discuss the legislative provision governing the

  limitation period in the execution of a decree i.e.,
Article 136
of the

  Act. The said Article is specific as it prescribes and deals with the

  applications for the execution of decrees and orders. It provides

  that the execution proceedings have to be initiated within 12 years

  from the date when the decree or order becomes enforceable or

  where the decree or any subsequent order directs any payment of

  money or the delivery of any property to be made at a certain date

  or at recurring periods, when default in making the payment or

  delivery in respect of which execution is sought, takes place.
3
4. This Court, in
Deep Chand v. Mohan Lal
1(2 judges), while dealing

  with the interpretation of
Article 136
of the Act made pertinent

  observations to the effect that:
i.     A decree or order becomes enforceable from its date;
ii.    In appropriate cases the court passing the decree may

            prescribe      the       time   wherefrom   the   decree   becomes

            enforceable on a future date.
iii.   The purpose of an execution proceeding is to enable the

            decree-holder to obtain the fruits of his decree.
iv.    In case where the language of the decree is capable of two

            interpretations, one of which assists the decree-holder to

            obtain the fruits of the decree and the other prevents him

            from taking the benefits of the decree, the interpretation

            which assists the decree-holder should be accepted.
v.     A decree is not to be rendered futile on technicalities. A

            rational approach is necessitated in cases where a decree

            has been the subject of prolonged litigation and a fair

            construction is to be given thereto.
5.
In
Akkayanaicker v. A.A.A. Kotchadainaidu & Anr.
2, this Court

  (2-Judge Bench) held that in view of the words "when the decree


  1 (2000) 6 SCC 259, Paragraph 5.
2 (2004) 12 SCC 469
4
or order becomes enforceable" occurring in
Article 136
of the Act,

     the starting point of limitation would be the date on which the

     decree becomes capable of execution.
6. Furthermore, in
Bimal Kumar v. Shakuntala Debi3
, this Court (2

     Judges) observed:
“41.
In this context, we may usefully refer to
                      the dictum in
Ratansingh v. Vijaysingh
[(2001) 1
                      SCC 469] wherein, while dwelling upon the
                      concept of enforceability of a decree and the
                      effect of an order of stay passed by the appellate
                      court, the Bench stated thus:
“8. When is a decree becoming enforceable?
                      Normally a decree or order becomes enforceable
                      from its date. But cases are not unknown when
                      the decree becomes enforceable on some future
                      date or on the happening of certain specified
                      events. The expression ‘enforceable’ has been
                      used to cover such decrees or orders also which
                      become enforceable subsequently.” ”

                                                  (Emphasis Supplied)
7.   Before adverting to the facts of the case, it is significant to

     reproduce clause 6 of compromise decree dt 26.04.1960 in Civil

     First Appeal No. 11/1959 :
“That after institution of this suit and during
                      the pendency of the case in the District Judge
                      Court, the appellant started proceedings to
                      surrender certain part of the land to the
                      government. But actual possession over this
                      piece of land is of the Respondents No. 1 to 4.
                      Respondents No. 1 to 4 shall be entitled to
                      maintain their right and possession over the

     3 (2012) 3 SCC 548
5
same as before and would be entitled for getting
                    the proceedings of the surrender as terminated,
                    and for this they may initiate legal action. The
                    appellants by adducing their statement etc., as
                    per their necessity/requirement, shall assist to
                    the respondent alas after terminating all kinds of
                    legal actions, if the aforesaid premise is taken
                    away from the possession of the respondent no 1
                    to 4, then the appellant shall give from their land
                    from the adjacent land from the east of the V
                    points indicated in the map to the respondent
                    No.1 to 4, admeasuring to 1 bigha 5 biswas = one
                    & a quarter bigha from where so ever the
                    appellants may desire to do so, and in that
                    condition the respondent no. 1 to 4 shall have
                    the right to take the same.”
8.   A perusal of the above clause of the compromise decree clearly

     shows that during the pendency of the suit, the Appellant

     surrendered the land to the State Government. Notably, this

     compromise decree was entered into wherein it was specified that

     if due to such surrender the Respondents (Decree holders) were to

     lose possession of the land, then the Appellant (Judgement Debtor)

     would give 1 bigha and 5 biswas to the former.
9.   The facts of the instant appeal reveal that the cause of action to

     execute the compromise decree arose when the premises were

     taken   away    from     the   possession      of   the    Decree    holders

     (Respondents Nos.1 to 4). The dispossession of the Respondents

     was confirmed vide final decree passed by the Civil Court in Suit

     No.30 A/87 when rights in favor of third person, namely, Mr. Malik
6
Ram, were finally determined. Hence in our considered view, the

    cause of action would arise only on 31.03.1994. The prerequisite

    for enforceability of clause 6 is the dispossession of the defendants,

    de facto or de jure.
10. Looking at it through a different lens, it appears that clause 6 of

    the compromise decree could not have been executed unless the

    Decree Holders were to lose their right of possession, which fact

    was not a possibility unless such         rights stood conclusively

    determined by the Civil Court.
11. As discussed above, the limitation period would commence only

    with the decree becoming enforceable and thus is capable of being

    executed. In the instant case, the relevant date from which the

    period of limitation will begin only with effect from 31.03.1994. The

    period of twelve years is computable from the said date, hence the

    Execution Application made on 17.07.1995 is within Limitation.
12. It is also noted that during the pendency of this appeal, the

    opportunity for compromise was given to the parties. But, no

    compromise could be arrived at.
7
13. In view of the discussion above, we are of the considered view that

    the Courts below rightly held that the Execution Application is

    within Limitation.
14. Before disposing of this Appeal, we take note of the submission of

    the Decree holders that the cheques, even though received were

    not presented as the settlement failed. Such a statement is taken

    on record.
15. Thus, this Appeal is dismissed. Interlocutory Application(s) if any,

    stand disposed of. No order as to costs.
………..………………J.
                                                 (KRISHNA MURARI)




                                                 ……………………..…J.
                                                   (SANJAY KAROL)

    Dated: 17th April, 2023
    Place: New Delhi.