[Cites
8
, Cited by
2
]
Supreme Court of India
M/S Asian Avenues Pvt Ltd vs Sri Syed Shoukat Hussain on 28 April, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
NON-REPORTABLE


                                     IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                      CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                      CIVIL APPEAL NO.2927 OF 2023



                         M/S. ASIAN AVENUES PVT LTD.                   … APPELLANT


                                                    versus


                         SRI SYED SHOUKAT HUSSAIN                    ... RESPONDENT



                                             J U D G M E N T
ABHAY S. OKA, J.
FACTS
1.   The present appeal is by the defendant in a suit filed by
                         the respondent.   The respondent-plaintiff claims to be the
                         owner of the suit property, more particularly described in the
                         plaint. There was a Development Agreement-cum-General
                         Power of Attorney (for short, ‘the Development Agreement’)
                         executed on 23rd October 2008 by and between the appellant
Signature Not Verified   and the respondent.    By the Development Agreement, the
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.04.28
17:20:11 IST
appellant was granted permissive possession for the purposes
Reason:
of carrying out development work on the property subject
Civil Appeal No.2927/2023
Page 1 of 5
matter of the Development Agreement. There was a dispute
        between the parties, which led to the respondent cancelling the
        Development Agreement. The respondent issued a legal notice
        to the appellant calling upon him to execute a deed of
        cancellation of the Development Agreement. The prayer in the
        suit is for a decree directing the appellant to execute a deed of
        cancellation in respect of the Development Agreement. There is
        also a prayer for the delivery of possession of the suit property.
2.    After the suit summons was served, the appellant filed an
        application under Rule 11 of
Order VII of the Code of Civil
        Procedure
, 1908 (for short, ‘
CPC
’). The application was filed on
        the ground that in view of the arbitration clause in the
        Development Agreement, the dispute ought to be referred to
        arbitration. There was a prayer made for referring the dispute
       to arbitration. The Trial Court rejected the plaint. The Trial
       Court also exercised power under
Section 8
of the Arbitration
        and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for short ‘the
Arbitration Act
’). The
       Trial Court directed the parties to refer their dispute to
       arbitration.         In a revision application preferred by the
        respondent, the High Court has interfered and has set aside
        the order of the Trial Court.
SUBMISSIONS
3.    The learned counsel appearing for the appellant pointed
        out that the High Court relied upon a decision of the Division
        Bench of the same Court, which holds that the adjudication on
        the issue whether there is a cancellation of the Development
Civil Appeal No.2927/2023
Page 2 of 5
Agreement will operate in rem and therefore, the arbitration
        clause cannot be invoked.
4.       The learned counsel appearing for the appellant relied
        upon a decision of the Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of this
        Court in the case of
Deccan Paper Mills Company Limited v.
        Regency Mahavir Properties and Ors.1
. He submitted that
        this Court has held that action instituted under
Section 31
of
        the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (for short ‘the
Specific Relief Act
’)
        is not an action in rem. He would, therefore, submit that the
        order of the High Court is erroneous and, therefore, the order
        of the Trial Court be restored.
5.       The learned counsel appearing for the respondent
        submitted that the arbitration clause will not apply as the
        prayer in the suit is for cancellation of the agreement in
        accordance with
Section 31
of the Specific Relief Act.           Her
        submission is that the issues arising under
Section 31
of the
        Specific Relief Act can be adjudicated only by a competent Civil
        Court.
OUR VIEW
6.       We have considered the submissions. Admittedly, there
        is an arbitration clause in the Development Agreement, which
        reads thus:
"All the disputes arising out of or in
                        connection with this agreement shall be
                        initially resolved by mutual discussions
                        among the developer and landowner or the
                        nominated representatives of both the
1
(2021) 4 SCC 786
Civil Appeal No.2927/2023
Page 3 of 5
parties. In case of disputes not resolved
                     by mutual discussions, the same shall be
                     referred to the arbitration in accordance
                     with the provisions of the
Arbitration
                     and Conciliation Act
1996. The disputes
                     shall be referred to the mutually agreed
                     arbitrator within from the cause of action.
The award of the arbitrator shall be binding
                     and final on both the parties."
(emphasis added)
7.    The dispute, whether the Development Agreement stands
        cancelled or whether the agreement can be lawfully cancelled,
        is a dispute arising out of or in connection with the
        Development Agreement.        Therefore, as per the arbitration
        clause, if the issue concerning cancellation is not mutually
        resolved, the same must be referred to arbitration.
8.    The only ground on which the High Court has interfered
        is that the adjudication pursuant to invocation of
Section 31
of
        the Specific Relief Act is an adjudication in rem.    However, in
        the case of Deccan Paper Mills Company Limited1, this
        Court has categorically held that it is impossible to hold that
        an action instituted under
Section 31
of the Specific Relief for
        cancellation of an instrument is an action in rem. In view of
        the applicability of the arbitration clause to the dispute subject
        matter of the suit filed by the respondent, the learned Trial
        Judge was justified in passing an order under
Section 8
of the
        Arbitration Act by directing that the dispute be referred to the
        arbitration.
Civil Appeal No.2927/2023
Page 4 of 5
9.    Therefore, the appeal succeeds.      We set aside the
        impugned judgment and order of the High Court and restore
        the judgment and order of the Trial Court. Parties shall act in
        accordance with the mandate of
Section 8
of the Arbitration
        Act. The appeal is allowed on the above terms with no order as
        to costs.
.………………………J.
                                                 (Abhay S. Oka)


                                                 ..………..……………J.
                                                 (Rajesh Bindal)
        New Delhi;
April 28, 2023.
Civil Appeal No.2927/2023
Page 5 of 5