[Cites
2
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Radhey Shyam vs The State Of Rajasthan on 12 April, 2023
Author:
Abhay S. Oka
Bench:
Rajesh Bindal
,
Abhay S. Oka
NON­REPORTABLE

                                       IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                     CRIMINAL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                      CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.2203 of 2010


                              Radhey Shyam & Ors.                 …..Appellants

                                                    Versus

                              State of Rajasthan                …..Respondent



                                                 JUDGMENT
Abhay S. Oka, J.
FACTUAL ASPECTS
1.      The appeal is by accused nos.9, 2 and 1
                              respectively, who have been convicted for the
                              offences punishable under Section 148 and Section
                              302 r/w
Section 149
of the Indian Penal Code (
IPC
).
                              There were 29 accused named in the charge sheet,
Signature Not Verified
out of which accused nos.1, 2, 5, 7, 9, 15, 17 and
Digitally signed by
Anita Malhotra
Date: 2023.04.12
20 were convicted by the Sessions Court and the
16:55:40 IST
Reason:
remaining 21 were acquitted.     By the impugned
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 1 of 9
judgment,          the     High    Court    has      upheld       the
     conviction of the appellants.
2.      There was a political rivalry between the
     family of the deceased Raghunath Singh and some
     of the accused persons who belong to the Ahir
     community and who had formed a party known as
     Azad party. The incident is of 16th April 1976. PW­
     6 Shiv Raj Singh, who is the brother of the
     deceased           Raghunath           Singh,     lodged         First
     Information Report (FIR). A group of Ahirs attacked
     the deceased.            According to the prosecution case,
     PW nos.2, 3 and 4 were the eyewitnesses. The Trial
     Court discarded the testimony of PW­2 but believed
     the testimony of PW­3 Krishna, the minor, who was
     the daughter of the deceased, and PW­4 Kanwarbai,
     who is the mother of the deceased.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES
3.      The        learned    counsel      appearing       for    the
     appellants submitted that PW­3 is a child witness
     whose evidence is required to be scanned very
     cautiously. Inviting our attention to the evidence of
     PW­3      Krishna         and,    in   particular,   her     cross­
     examination, she submitted that her testimony
     cannot be held to be reliable, particularly when the
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 2 of 9
identification of the accused made by the witness in
     the Court is highly doubtful. Moreover, PW­4 could
     not identify a single accused in the Court and,
     therefore, it was unsafe to rely upon her testimony.
     She also pointed out that there was a delay of 3
     days in sending the FIR to the learned Magistrate.
     There was a political rivalry between the family of
     the deceased and the political party to which the
     accused belonged and, therefore, during the period
     of these three days, false implication of the accused
     must have taken place.
4.      Learned    senior    counsel     representing   the
     State urged that perusal of the answers given to the
     preliminary questions put to the child witness (PW­
3) shows that the witness had good intelligence and
     understanding.        He submitted that though she
     correctly identified the accused no.1 as the son of
     Ramchander, by mistake she mentioned the name
     of Modu (acquitted accused), who was also the son
     of one Ramchander.          He submitted that this is a
     minor discrepancy which is not sufficient to
     discredit the version of PW­3.          He submitted that
     PW­4      Kanwarbai    named     five    persons   as   the
     accused. He submitted that PW­4 was not able to
     identify the accused with reference to their names.
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 3 of 9
He submitted that this can happen easily due to
     lapse of time. He would, therefore, submit that the
     conclusions drawn by the High Court and the
     Sessions      Court,      as   regards    the   guilt    of   the
     appellants, cannot be faulted with.
REASONS AND CONCLUSIONS
5.       We find that the prosecution case depends
     only on the testimony of PW­3 Krishna and PW­4
     Kanwarbai. The age of PW­3 was 12 years at the
     time of the recording of her evidence. Evidence of
     PW­3 cannot be rejected only on the ground that
     her age was 12 years.             However, being a child
     witness,      her    evidence     needs    a    very     careful
     evaluation with greater circumspection considering
     the fact that a child witness can always be easily
     tutored.       Therefore, we have made a careful
     scrutiny of her version.           In the examination­in­
     chief, she stated that she saw that 30­35 persons
     were assaulting her father (the deceased).                    She
     stated     that     she    identified     persons,      namely,
     Raghunath (accused no.1); Shyama (accused no.8);
     Bhavana (Bhawani) – accused no.20; Modu and
     Chaturbhuj         (accused    no.15).      There       are   two
     accused by the name of Modu (accused no.2 and
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 4 of 9
accused no.14).         Though she named Shyama
     (accused no.8), she described him as Bhavana’s
     (Bhawani’s) brother.          As can be seen from the
     names of the accused, Bhavana is the son of Kana
     Ahir and accused no.9 Radhey Shyam is also a son
     of Kana Ahir. For identifying the accused who were
     present in the dock, a very peculiar procedure was
     followed. The accused, whose names were taken by
     PW­3, were told to stand outside the dock and
     others were told to continue in the dock. While the
     five accused were being brought out of the dock,
     the witness was told to remain out of the Court
     Hall. This procedure was unfair to the accused as it
     was aimed at facilitating easy identification of the
     five   accused     by   the    minor   witness.   Such   a
     procedure is not fair to the accused. It is noted in
     the deposition that PW­3 identified accused Radhey
     Shyam (accused no.9) as a son of Kana by calling
     him Shyama.         She correctly identified accused
     Bhavana, son of Kana, Modu, son of Nathu and
     Chaturbhuj as a son of Onkar.              She identified
     accused no.1 Raghunath as Modu as a son of
     Ramchander.        In the cross­examination, when a
     Court question was put to her, calling upon her to
     explain why she has identified Modu by saying that
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 5 of 9
he is Raghunath, the witness replied that she had
     forgotten due to lapse of time.         In response to a
     question who was Radhey Shyam, she replied that
     he was a brahmin and is not an accused.              She
     accepted that her grandmother had told her that
     their family had a fight with Ahirs, who have
     formed the Azad party. She also accepted that her
     grandmother told her the names of Modu, Bhavan,
     Chaturbhuj and Raghunath as persons forming the
     party. She stated that she had told the police while
     recording      her   statement   that    30­35   persons
     belonging to the Azad party were assaulting her
     father. The manner in which the minor witness
     identified the accused, it becomes unsafe to convict
     the accused based only on her testimony.
6.      Now we turn to the deposition of PW­4
     Kanwarbai, who is the mother of the deceased.
     According to her version, PW­3 Krishna came to her
     weeping and stated that 30­35 persons were
     beating her father. When she rushed to the spot,
     she found her son (Raghunath) crying in pain. She
     stated that in her presence, Gopal (accused no.17)
     inflicted a blow on the ear of the deceased.         She
     stated that accused no.20 gave a lathi blow on the
     arm and left armpit of her son. She stated that
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 6 of 9
accused no.1 Raghunath, accused no.7 Pratap and
     accused no.5 also gave lathi blows to her son.
     When she was questioned whether she was able to
     identify 30­35 accused persons with their names,
     her response was that she knew their names and
     also their father’s names and she was in a position
     to identify them.     Thereafter she stated several
     names. When she was called upon to identify the
     accused, she could not identify any one of the
     accused with reference to their names. The learned
     Judge noted in the deposition that PW­4 could not
     identify any accused.      The note made by the
     learned Sessions Judge reads thus :
“Note: ­ The witness by going close the
             accused, taking round again and again,
             by pushing aside in front and by going
             close the rear person tried to have a
             look, identified in this manner and
             sometime by standing for a moment
             close to the accused went ahead and on
             return could identify someone, also
             stated that vision is not clear because
             there is some darkness. Two tube lights
             are burning in court whereby sufficient
             light is there and one tube light is on
             the side of the accused themselves. The
             witness stated that though the light
             is sufficient and faces are also visible
             but it is not assessed as to who are
             these persons.”
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 7 of 9
(emphasis added)



     Thereafter PW­4 was asked who were the accused
     out of the persons present. She stated that all of
     them were there but their faces were not clear for
     identification.
7.      Thus, PW­4, who claims to be an eye witness,
     could not identify a single accused by name in the
     Court though she claimed that she was in a
     position to identify the accused by their names as
     well as their respective father’s name.
8.      We have already discussed the evidence of
     PW­3, the minor witness.      Her testimony shows
     that she got confused while identifying at least two
     accused though five accused whom she allegedly
     named were made to stand separately from the
     remaining accused. The version of PW­3 Krishna,
     when it comes to the identity of the accused, does
     not inspire confidence.     In any case, it is very
     unsafe to convict the accused on the basis of such
     testimony, especially when the only other eye
     witness (PW­4) believed by the Trial Court could not
     identify a single accused in the Court. The learned
     Trial Judge noted that there was sufficient light in
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 8 of 9
the courtroom and faces of the accused were clearly
     visible.
9.      We are, therefore, of the considered opinion
     that    the    identity   of   the   named   accused   as
     assailants of the deceased has not been established
     in the Court beyond a reasonable doubt.            Then
     what remains is the evidence of the alleged recovery
     of the weapons of assault at the instance of the
     accused. The conviction cannot be sustained only
     on the basis of the alleged recovery.
10.     Therefore, the conviction of the appellants
     under impugned judgments and orders is hereby
     quashed and set aside and the appellants are
     acquitted of the charge levelled against them. The
     appellants are on bail.         Their bail bonds stand
     cancelled. The appeal is accordingly allowed.
……………………………J.
                                     [ABHAY S. OKA]


                                     ..…………………………J.
                                     [RAJESH BINDAL]

     New Delhi
     April 12, 2023.
Crl.A.No.2203 of 2010
Page 9 of 9