[Cites
4
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
T. D. Vivek Kumar vs Ranbir Chaudhary on 28 April, 2023
Author:
M.R. Shah
Bench:
C.T. Ravikumar
,
M.R. Shah
REPORTABLE
                                IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                              CIVIL APPEAL NOS. 2514-2516 OF 2023


                         T.D. Vivek Kumar & Anr.                  ..Appellant(s)

                                               Versus


                         Ranbir Chaudhary                   …Respondent(s)




                                         JUDGMENT
M.R. SHAH, J.
1.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the

                               impugned judgment and order passed by the

                               High   Court   of   Punjab   and    Haryana    at

                               Chandigarh in Review Application No. 149-

                               C/2016 in RSA No. 596/2012 and XOBJC -
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Neetu Sachdeva
Page 1 of 19
Date: 2023.04.28
16:27:27 IST
Reason:
10C/2010,      the   original   defendants   have

      preferred the present appeals.
2.    The facts leading to the present appeals are

      as under: -
2.1   That a “sale agreement” was entered into

      between appellant No. 1 as attorney of

      appellant No. 2 (original defendants) and the

      respondent herein (original plaintiff) for sale

      of the suit plot in question for a consideration

      of Rs. 17,61,700/-. The date for execution

      and registration of sale deed was tentatively

      fixed as 18.09.2004. A total amount of Rs. 2

      lakh was paid as earnest money by the

      respondent. That thereafter, respondent –

      original plaintiff instituted the civil suit in the

      Court   of    Additional   Civil   Judge   (Senior
Page 2 of 19
Division),        Faridabad,     seeking   specific

      performance         of    sale   agreement    and

      consequential relief of injunction. The suit

      was resisted by the appellants herein –

      original defendants on all grounds including

      the ground that even as per the agreement to

      sell and on failure of the defendants to

      execute the sale deed, the plaintiff shall be

      entitled to double the amount given as an

      advance and therefore, the plaintiff is not

      entitled     to     the    decree    for   specific

      performance.
2.2   The learned Trial Court vide judgment and

      decree dated 16.01.2010 refused to pass a

      decree for specific performance of the sale

      agreement, however, decreed the suit for

      recovery of Rs. 4 lakhs i.e., double of the
Page 3 of 19
earnest   money     paid   by   the   plaintiff    in

      accordance   with    the   contract     i.e.,     sale

      agreement.
2.3   The First Appellate Court dismissed the

      appeal. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied

      with the judgment and decree passed by the

      learned Trial Court confirmed by the First

      Appellate Court refusing to grant the relief of

      specific performance of the sale agreement,

      the respondent herein – original plaintiff

      preferred the second appeal before the High

      Court. The appellant(s) also filed the cross

      objection in the second appeal on the findings

      recorded by the learned Trial Court and the

      First Appellate Court that the plaintiff was

      ready and willing to perform his part of the
Page 4 of 19
contract. By the impugned judgment and

      order   dated   27.07.2016   the   High    Court

      allowed   the   second   appeal    by   way   of

      overturning the concurrent judgments of the

      learned Trial Court confirmed by the First

      Appellate Court and consequently, granted

      the relief of specific performance of the sale

      agreement by observing that as the plaintiff

      was ready and willing to perform his part of

      the contract and therefore, he is entitled to

      the decree for specific performance. The High

      Court dismissed the cross objection preferred

      by the appellants – original defendants.


2.4   That aggrieved by the judgment and order

      dated 27.07.2016 passed by the High Court

      allowing the second appeal and dismissing
Page 5 of 19
the cross objection, the appellants herein

      preferred Special Leave Petition (C) Nos.
32215-32216/2016 before this Court. The

      appellants were relegated to file a review

      petition before the High Court as according to

      the    appellants     the    High   Court   did   not

      consider the relevant clauses of the sale

      agreement which as such were considered by

      the learned Trial Court as well as the First

      Appellate Court.
2.5   That    thereafter,    the    appellants    filed the

      present Review Application No. 149/2016

      before the High Court. By the impugned

      judgment and order the High Court has

      dismissed the review application by observing

      that there is no error apparent on record and
Page 6 of 19
no ground for review is made out. Hence, the

     present appeals.
3.   Shri Guru Krishna Kumar, learned Senior

     Advocate     appearing    on    behalf     of    the

     appellants    –    original    defendants,      has

     vehemently submitted that in the facts and

     circumstances of the case the High Court has

     committed a very serious error in dismissing

     the review application which as such was

     filed pursuant to the liberty reserved by this

     Court. It is submitted that as while allowing

     the second appeal the relevant clauses of the

     sale agreement was not considered by the

     High Court and there were certain factual

     errors and even the cross objection was

     rejected   without   consideration;      the    High
Page 7 of 19
Court ought to have allowed the review

      application and ought to have considered the

      entire   appeal   on    merits.    It   is    further

      submitted that even otherwise the High Court

      has materially erred in passing the decree for

      specific performance of the sale agreement

      which as such was refused by the learned

      Trial Court as well as the First Appellate

      Court.
3.1   It is submitted that even while allowing the

      second   appeal   the    High     Court      did   not

      specifically frame any substantial question of

      law which as such was required to be framed

      as per
Section 100
of the CPC.
3.2   It is further submitted that the High Court

      has not properly appreciated and considered
Page 8 of 19
the fact that even as per the sale agreement if

      the first party – appellant fail or refuse to

      execute    the    sale   agreement   within    the

      stipulated time, the seller shall be responsible

      to pay double the amount given as an

      advance.   It    is   submitted   that   therefore,

      assuming that there was failure on the part of

      the defendant(s) to execute the sale deed in

      favour of the plaintiff within the stipulated

      time, the plaintiff shall only be entitled to

      double the amount given as an advance. It is

      submitted that therefore, as such both the

      Courts below rightly refused to pass a decree

      of specific performance.
3.3   Making the above submissions and relying

      upon paragraph 31 of the decision of this
Page 9 of 19
Court   in   the   case   of
P.   D’Souza   Vs.

     Shondrilo Naidu
(2004) 6 SCC 649, it is

     prayed to allow the present appeals.
4.   While opposing the present appeals, Shri

     Daya    Krishan    Sharma,     learned   counsel

     appearing on behalf of the respondent –

     original plaintiff has vehemently submitted

     that in the present case there are concurrent

     findings recorded by all the courts below on

     readiness and willingness on the part of the

     plaintiff to perform his part of the contract

     and it was the defendant(s) who did not

     perform their part of the contract and did not

     execute the sale deed though, the plaintiff

     was ready and willing to pay the sale amount.

     It is submitted that therefore, in view of the
Page 10 of 19
concurrent findings recorded by all the courts

      below, the High Court has not committed any

      error in passing the decree for specific

      performance of the sale agreement.


4.1   It is submitted that therefore, the impugned

      judgment and order passed by the High Court

      granting relief for specific performance of the

      sale agreement may not be interfered with by

      this Court. Reliance is also placed on the

      decision of this Court in the case of P.

      D’souza (supra).
5.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on

      behalf of the respective parties at length.
6.    At the outset, it is required to be noted that

      as such there are concurrent findings of facts

      recorded by all the courts below on the
Page 11 of 19
readiness and willingness of the plaintiff to

      perform his part of the contract which are not

      required to be interfered with by this Court in

      exercise of powers under
Article 136
of the

      Constitution of India. However, at the same

      time, what is required to be considered is

      whether in the facts and circumstances of the

      case,   the   High   Court   is   justified   in

      overturning the judgment(s) of the learned

      Trial Court as well as the First Appellate

      Court refusing to pass the decree for specific

      performance of the sale agreement?


6.1   At the outset, it is required to be noted that

      as such while allowing the second appeal and

      overturning   the judgment(s)     and   order(s)

      passed by the learned Trial Court as well as
Page 12 of 19
the First Appellate Court, the High Court has

      not framed the substantial question of law,

      which is required to be framed under
Section

      100
of the CPC.
6.2   Even otherwise on merits also looking to the

      terms and conditions stipulated in the sale

      agreement the High Court has erred in

      passing the decree for specific performance

      which was refused by the learned Trial Court

      as well as the First Appellate Court. The

      relevant clause in the sale agreement reads

      as under: -
“2. That if the 2nd party fails to pay
         the     balance     amount       within
         stipulated time, the advance will be
         forfeited and if the first party fail or
         refuse to execute the sale deed and
         other necessary document in favour
         of the purchaser or in the name of
         his nominees within the stipulated
Page 13 of 19
time, the seller will be responsible to
          pay the double of the amount given
          as advance.”

6.3   Thus, as per clause 2 of the sale agreement, if

      the second party fails to pay the balance

      amount within stipulated time, the advance

      will be forfeited and if the seller fail or refuse

      to execute the sale deed and other necessary

      document in favour of the purchaser/buyer

      or in the name of his nominees within the

      stipulated time, the seller will be responsible

      to pay double the amount given as an

      advance. Therefore, on failure on the part of

      the seller to execute the sale deed within the

      stipulated time, the purchaser/buyer shall be

      entitled to the double of the amount given as

      an advance. It cannot be disputed that the

      plaintiff being a party to the agreement to sell
Page 14 of 19
is   bound     by   the    terms    and     conditions

      stipulated in the sale agreement. Therefore,

      on true interpretation of clause 2 of the sale

      agreement, the learned Trial Court as well as

      the First Appellate Court as such rightly

      refused   to    pass      the   decree    for   specific

      performance of the sale agreement and rightly

      passed the decree for recovery of Rs. 4 lakhs

      being double the amount given as an advance

      which as such was in consonance with the

      clause 2 of the sale agreement.
6.4   An identical question came to be considered

      by this Court in the case of P. D’souza

      (supra) and after considering the earlier

      decision of this Court in the case of
M.L.

      Devender Singh Vs. Syed Khaja
(1973) 2
Page 15 of 19
SCC 515, this Court observed and held that

where the sum named is an amount the

payment of which may be substituted for the

performance of the act at the election of the

person by whom the money is to be paid or

the act done, the Court may refuse to pass

the decree for specific performance. In the

present   case,   the   condition    specifically

stipulates that in case of failure on the part of

the seller to execute the sale deed within the

stipulated time the buyer shall be entitled to

double the amount given as an advance.
Therefore, the sum is specifically named i.e.,

double the amount of advance paid. Though,

the High Court has relied upon the decision

in the case of P. D’souza (supra), the

aforesaid aspect has not been considered by
Page 16 of 19
the     High        Court,   more         particularly,   the

     observations made in paragraph 31 in its true

     perspective.
7.   In view of the above, the High Court has

     materially          erred    in     setting      aside    the

     concurrent judgment(s) of the learned Trial

     Court as well as the First Appellate Court

     refusing to pass the decree for specific

     performance and passing the decree for

     recovery of Rs. 4 lakhs being double the

     amount         of     advance           paid.    Under    the

     circumstances, the impugned judgment and

     order     passed        by        the     High    Court    is

     unsustainable.
8.   In view of the above and for the reasons

     stated above, present appeal(s) arising out of
Page 17 of 19
rejecting the review application and the

judgment and order passed by the High Court

in second appeal are allowed. Consequently,

order passed in review application and the

judgment and order passed by the High Court

in second appeal granting relief for specific

performance of the sale agreement deserve to

be   quashed    and    set   aside   and   is/are

accordingly     quashed      and     set   aside.

Consequently,    the   judgment      and   decree

passed by the learned Trial Court affirmed by

the First Appellate Court stands restored. The

appeal arising out of the dismissal of the

cross objection stands disposed of.
………………………………….J.
                          [M.R. SHAH]
Page 18 of 19
………………………………….J.
                      [C.T. RAVIKUMAR]
NEW DELHI;
APRIL 28, 2023
Page 19 of 19