[Cites
29
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
The Sub Registrar Amudalavalasa vs M/S Dankuni Steels Ltd. on 26 April, 2023
Author:
K.M. Joseph
Bench:
Hrishikesh Roy
,
K.M. Joseph
REPORTABLE


                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                               CIVIL APPEAL NO(S). 3134-3135 OF 2023
                               [@ SLP (CIVIL) NO(S).8708-8709/2019]


          THE SUB REGISTRAR,
          AMUDALAVALASA & ANR.                                                   …APPELLANT(S)

                                                      VERSUS

          M/S DANKUNI STEELS LTD. & ORS.                                         …RESPONDENT(S)


                                               JUDGMENT
K.M. JOSEPH, J.
1.             Delay condoned.            Leave granted.
2.             By    order      dated     13.06.2002,           the    High    Court    of

          Andhra               Pradesh      ordered     M/s.         Midwest      Iron    &    Steel

          company                  Ltd.    (which     is       Respondent         No.3    in     the

          appeals) to be wound up.                             Though pursuant to order

          dated               22.09.2003,         efforts          were   made    to     sell    the
Signature Not Verified
property of respondent no.3 in three lots, finally,
Digitally signed by
NEETA SAPRA
Date: 2023.04.26
17:24:04 IST
Reason:
based               on    an    auction    for       a    consolidated        sale,    the
1
second respondent herein, namely, M/s. SMC Marketing

Private     Ltd.    who    figured       as   the    highest     bidder,

became the successful auction purchaser.                    It bid for

the property which consisted of land, building, civil

works,    plant &        machinery and        current assets,        etc.

The    amount      for    which    the    second      respondent      was

declared the highest bidder was Rs.8.35 crores.                       On

the basis of a direction given in C.A. No. 1203 of

2004 at the instance of the second respondent, the

Official Liquidator was accorded permission by the

learned Company Judge to execute the sale deed in

favour of the first respondent in the appeals, viz,

M/s.   Dankuni Steel        Ltd.        A sale       deed came    to be

executed by the Official Liquidator in favour of the

first respondent dated 5th August, 2004.                    In the sale

deed   in   the    preambular      portion      we    may   notice   the

following statements:
“D. WHEREAS the Official Liquidator has put
       the properties of the Company for sale in
       terms of orders of the Hon'ble High Court and
       whereas the Hon'ble High Court of Andhra
       Pradesh, Hyderabad by an order dated 04-02-
       2004 made in C.A.No.736/2003 in R.C.C.No.
       10/2001  (copy   enclosed)  was   pleased  to
       confirm the sale of the assets pf the Company
2
such as land, building, plant and machinery
     and other assets in favour of Messrs SMC
     Marketing Pvt. Ltd., having its office at
     Room No.617, 6th floor, P 41, Princep Street,
     Kolkatta - 700 072, represented by its
     authorized representative Sri Amar Chand.
     Choudhary for a total sale consideration of
     Rs.8.35 crores.
E. WHEREAS the Hon'ble High Court of Andhra
     Pradesh, Hyderabad passed by an order dated
     15-06-2004 made in C.A. No. 1202/2004 was
     pleased to direct the Official Liquidator to
     execute necessary conveyance deeds for the
     land sold in auction in favour of the vendee
     here in who is the nominee of the said
     highest bidder Messrs SMC Marketing Pvt. Ltd.
     A copy of which is enclosed herewith.”
3.   Clause H of the preamble, reads as follows:-
“H. WHEREAS the Vendee has paid the full
     consideration to the vendor within the time
     stipulated by the Hon'ble High Court of
     Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad and as per the
     terms and conditions of the sale, properties
     have been sold by the Vendor to the Vendee on
     'as is where is whatever there is basis'.
     Vendor hereby admits and acknowledges that he
     has received the full consideration from the
     Vendee and there is no balance payable by
     him. Further the Vendor has already given
     possession of the Schedule property to the
     Yendee under due acknowledgement. The Vendor
     hereby conveys, transfers and assigns all the
     rights, title interest together with all the
     liberties, advantages, held and enjoyed by
     Messrs Midwest Iron & Steel Co. Ltd., to the
     Vendee, who shall hereinafter enjoy the same
     with full and absolute rights without any
     dispute or objection from any source as
     owner.
3
AND WHEREAS the total sale consideration is
     Rs.8.35 crores for the entire assets of the
     company comprising of land, building, Civil
     works, plant & machinery and current assets,
     etc"
An amount of Rs.1,01,05,000/- is taken as the
     value of the land, building and civil works
     basing on the offer received by the official
     liquidator when the assets were put for sale
     individually and the purchaser has agreed to
     pay the stamp duty / registration fees
     /transfer fees as per the-value derived by
     the sub registrar.
WHEREAS the land to an extent of Acres
     46.7167 cents situated in Dusi Village as per
     details given below is now registered in
     favour of the VENDEE through this document,
     hereinafter referred to as the 'SCHEDULED
     PROPERTY'   for  brevity,   which  is   fully
     described in the schedule of property and
     clearly delineated in red colour in the plan
     annexed hereto.
4.   Next, the recital clause (1) reads as follows:
“NOW THE VENDOR HEREBY ASSURES AND COVENANTS
     THE VENDEE AS UNDER:
In consideration of the said amount paid by
     the   Vendee,  the   Vendors  here.by   scll,
     transfer, convey, alienate, assign unto and
     to the use of the Vendee absolutely and
     forever all that the scheduled property along
     with all the rights, easements, interests
     etc., the rights which ordinarily pass on
     through such sale on and over the said land
     in favour of the Vendee to hold and to enjoy
     the same as absolute owner.”
4
5.   Next, we must notice the schedule of the property

which inter alia reads as follows:
“All that piece and parcel of the property
     admeasuring acres of 46.7167 cents situated
     at Dusi Village, Srikakulam District, within
     the limits of Sub-Registrar, Amudalavalasa,
     belonging to M/s. Midwest Iron & Steel Co.
     Ltd. in the above R.S. Numbers sold by the
     Vendor to Vendee is bounded by…”         The
     boundaries are hereafter set out.
6.   Since the sale deed in favour of the nominee,

namely,    the     first    respondent     came    to   be   executed

pursuant      to    order    of     the   Company       Judge   dated

15.06.2004 made in C.A. No.1202 of 2004 as stated in

Clause    E   (supra),      we    may   notice    the   prayers   and

relevant part of the order.             They read as under:
“Application under
Section of the Companies
     Act, 1956
R/W Rule 9 of the Companies (Court)
     Rule, 1959, praying that this High Court may
     be pleased to direct the Official Liquidator
     to execute the sale deed in respect of the
     land and building and civil works belonging
     to   the    company   in   liquidation   fora
     consideration of Rs. 40,13,000/- in favour of
     the Applicant's nominees-M/s. Dankun·1 Steels
     Lim.1ted.
5
b) Direct the Official Liquidator to execute
a   sale   certificate  in  favour   of  the
Applicant's nominees. M/s. Dankuni Steels
Limited,   in   respect  of  the  plant  and
machinery for a consideration Rs. 751.27
Lakhs and in respect of the current assets
and furniture and fixtures in the sum of Rs.
43,60,000/-.
c) Direct the Official Liquidator to obtain
all the original documents of title deposited
by company in liquidation with financial
institutions viz., ICICI Bank Limited, IDBI,
Canara Bank, United Western bank Limited,
IFCI, IIBI and State Bank of India, and
deliver the same to the Applicant's nominees,
M/s. Dankuni Steels Limited.
This Application coming on for orders upon
reading the Judge's Summons and the affidavit
dated: 23-4-2004 and filed by Mr. Amar Chand
Choudary, authorized Representative of the
Application in support of this Application
and upon hearing the arguments of Mr. Anil
Kumar counsel for The Official Liquidator and
of Mr. S. Ravi, Advocate for the applicant
and of Mr. M. Anil Kumar, Counsel for the
Official   Liquidator   on  behalf   of   the
respondent”

“ … The learned counsel also placed before me
Form No.32 issued by the Office of Registrar
of Companies, Calcutta, showing that Sri Amit
Ganguly, S/o late B.N. Ganguly, who is the
Director of applicant       company in M/s.
Dankuni Steels Limited. A certificate issued
by the Director of the applicant company
placed before the Court would show that the
applicant company holds 9,000 (Nine thousand
only) shares of Rs.10/- each of M/ s. Dankuni
Steels Limited. …”
6
“…   Insofar as the relationship between the
       applicant company and M/ s. Dankuni Steels
       Limited, this Court is satisfied that the
       applicant is justified in taking sale deed in
       favour   of   M/s. Dankuni   Steels   Limited.
       Insofar as the relief in the application to
       direct the Official Liquidator to execute the
       sale deed in favour of M/s Dunkuni Steels
       Limited   for   a  consideration   of   Rs.40,
       13,000/- (Rupees forty lakh and thirteen
       thousand only) is confirmed in the auction
       conducted by this Court, as the land,
       building and machinery of the company in
       liquidation was sold to the applicant company
       at a price of Rs.8,35,00,000/- (Rupees eight
       crore thirty five lakh only), it would be
       better if the issue as to the value of the
       property in respect of which a conveyance
       deed has to be executed is decided by the
       Registration Authorities. It is needless to
       observe that at the time of completion of
       this exercise, Official Liquidator will hand
       over all the original documents in respect of
       the property.
The application is, accordingly, ordered.”

                                        (emphasis supplied)
7.     It is thereafter that as already noticed that the

sale     deed   came   to   be       executed   on   05.08.2004.

Respondents 1 and 2, it would appear claimed benefit

of GOMS No.103 dated 07.02.2001. The said GOMS read

as under inter alia:
"GOVERNMENT OF ANDHRA PRADESH
                          ABSTRACT
7
Indian Stamp Act, 1899
- 50°/o Exemption from
payment of Stamp Duty and Registration Fee on
the instruments of leases, lease-cum-sales
and sales executed in favour of Industrial
Units in the State for the purposes of
selling up or expansion or development of
Industries - Orders - Issued.
REVENUE (REGISTRATION.II) DEPARTMENT
G.0.Ms.No.103            Dated :07 .02.2001
                         Read the following:-
1. Letter from the Chairman and Managing
D1rector, A.P.I.I.C. No.S
IPC
/APIIC/M(Pig)/97,
dt.11.5.2000.
2.   From  the   Commissioner  and   Inspector
General of Registration and Stamps Letter
No.Sl/10783/2000, dt.28.9.2000 and even No.,
dt.17.11.2000.
3. G.O.Ms.No.9, Industries & Commerce
Department, dt.5.1.2001.
ORDER:-
In pursuance of the decisions of the SIPD,
orders were issued in G.O.Ms.No.9, Industries
&     Commerce    Department,     dt.5.1.2001,
enunciating a New Industrial Policy for 2000-
2005.    Among   various   other    decisions,
exemption of 50% Stamp Duty, Registration Fee
and Transfer Duty was allowed on lands meant
for Industrial use. Exemption of Stamp Duty
and Registration Fee 'for loan agreements,
credit deeds, mortgages and hypothecation
deeds executed by the Industries in favour of
banks or financial institutions has also been
included in the Policy. New Industrial Units
ether than listed as 'ineligible' in the
Government order cited third above, would be
eligible for the concession in stamp duty and
registration fees as notified below.
8
Basing on the above decision, the
following Notifications will be published in
the   next  issue  of   the  Andhra  Pradesh
Gazette:-
NOTIFICATION – I

In exercise of the powers conferred by clause
(a) of sub-section -(1) of
section 9
of the
Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (Central Act II of
1899), the Government of Andhra Pradesh
hereby reduces the stamp duty by 50 percent
on the instruments of leases, lease-cum-sales
and sales executed in favour of Industrial
units and also remits Stamp Duty in full on
laan agreements, credit deeds, mortgages and
hypothecation   deeds   executed    by   such
Industrial units in favour of banks or
financial institutions for the purposes of
setting up or expansion or development of
Industries.
NOTIFICATION – II

In exercise of the pówers conferred under
Section 78
of the Registration Act, 1908
(Central Act XVI of 1908), the Governor of
Andhra Pradesh hereby makes the following
amendment to the "Table of Fees" - issued in
G.O. MS. N0.1637, Revenue Department, dated
the 3rd September, 1958 and published at
pages 2250 to 2253 of Part I of the Andhra
Pradesh    Gazette,    Dated:ll.09.1993   is
subsequently amended from time to time.
AMENDMENT

In the said "Table of Fees" in article l(a),
after clause "K (XCXXIV)", the following
clause shall be added, namely :-
"K (XCXXV): The Registration Fee leviable
under this Article on the instructions of
leases, lease cum sales and sales executed in
9
favour of industrial units shall be reduced
           by 50 percent and no registration fee shall
           be leviable on loan agreements, credit deeds,
           mortgages and hypothecation deeds executed by
           such industrial units in favour of banks or
           financial institutions for the purposes of
           setting up or expansion or development of
           industries".
(BY ORDER AND IN THE NAME OF THE
                                 GOVERNOR OF ANDHRA PRADESH)
                                         K.C.MISRA PRINCIPAL
                                    SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT"
8.     It    would   appear      that       the    respondents     1   and   2

applied for registration of the sale deed according

to the appellants on the basis that the land and

building had to be registered with the value thereof

being shown as Rs.1,01,05,000/-.                       The Sub-Registrar,

namely, the first appellant by communication dated

12.08.2004       informed        the    first      respondent      that   the

registration         was     kept      pending         for   the   following

reasons:
(1)    The chargeable value as per the contents of the

            documents      was   assessed         to   be    Rs.8.35   crores

            whereas respondents 1 and 2 had stated that
10
only    the    land       and     buildings     were    being

           transferred for Rs.1,01,05,000/-.
(2)   Since 50% exemption was being claimed, the G.O.

           had to be verified thoroughly.
(3)   The land in some of the Survey Nos. were found

           to be Government land.
9.         The respondents 1 and 2 feeling aggrieved filed

Writ Petition No.16104 of 2001 challenging the said

communication.           The District Registrar, Srikakulam,

[the second appellant before us] directed the first

respondent        and    the   Official      Liquidator    to     deposit

Rs.8629025/-        as     stamp      duty     besides     penalty    of

Rs.1000/.         It is challenging the said communication

that       Respondents    1    and   2     filed   Writ   Petition   No.

19900 of 2004.           Both the Writ Petitions came to be

heard together and disposed by a learned Single Judge

by the Judgment dated 12.07.2005.                  The learned Single

Judge found inter alia as follows:
11
“5.   Though   the   Company   Court   initially
directed · auction of the assets of the
Company in three lots, having felt that the
bids received for the lots are inadequate,
the learned Judge directed sale of all the
three lots i.e. (i) Land, Buildings and Civil
Works; (ii) Plant and Machinery; and cJii)
Current Assets and Swaraj Mazda vehicle, as
one lot only. Therefore, the fact that the
Company Court originally directed sale of the
assets of the Company in three lots has no
relevance    for   deciding    these   petitions
because    second     petitioner,    admitted1y,
purchased the assets of the company as one
lot only, in the open auction held by the
Company Court, but not as three different
lots .
6. It is no doubt true, as per the proviso to
Sectiön 47A(6) of the,
Stamp Act
, instruments
executed by or on behalf .of the Central
Government or the State Government or any
authority or body incorporated by or under
any law for the time being in force and
wholly owned by Central/State Government, the
market value of the property shall be the
value   shown   in    such instrument.   This
provision, far from helping the petitioners,
would go against their contention that sale
deed can be executed for Lot l only, inasmuch
as assets of the company were advertised for
sale in three lots, because all the three
assets of the company were purchased by the
second petitioner only as one lot, but not in
three different lots, and since there is
nothing in the sale deed in question to show
the exact value of the Land, Building and
Civil works. The file produced by the
official liquidator shows that there was
correspondence     between   him   and    the
petitioners with regard to the contents etc.
of the sale deed to be executed by him i.e.
official liquidator. Here, I am constrained
to observe that the official liquidator does
12
not seem to have acted fairly while executing
the sale deed in question, and seems to have
made an attempt to favour the petitioners by
suppressing certain fact: and incorporating
the undermentioned highlighted portion in
page 3 of the sale deed in question reading -
"AND WHEREAS the total sale consideration
is Rs.8.35 crores for the entire assets of
the company comprising of land, building,
Civil works, plant & machinery and current
assets, etc., An amount of Rs.1,01,05,000/-
is taken as the value of the land, building
and civil works basing on the offer received
by the official liquidator when the assets
were put for sale individually and the
purchaser has agreed to pay the stamp
duty/registration fees/transfer fees as per
the value derived by the sub registrar."
obviously that statement, mentioning the
value     of      the     building     etc.    as
Rs.1,01,05,000/- is made on the basis of the
offers received by him (official liquidator)
on 04-12-2003 whereat M/s.Bhagya Nagar Metals
Ltd., offered Rs"101.05 lakhs for Lot No.1
and Rs.301.00 lakhs for Lot No.2, and
M/s.Mahavir Ghantakaram Enterprises offered
Rs.29.50 lakhs for Lot No.3. So, it is clear
that the total value of the offers for the
three    lot     received    by    the   official
liquidator, on 04-12-2003, was Rs.431.55
lakhs. But, on 30-12-2003, M/s.Concast Ispat
Ltd., which (as per the letter dated 13-08-
2004   of    the   Genera!    Manager,   District
Industries Centre, Srikakulam, addressed to
the fourth respondent, relied on by the
petitioners, produced as a material document
along with the petition) seems to be a group
company    of     the   petitioners,     gave   a
consolidated offer for Rs.576.00 lakhs for
the three lots put together, and the bid
ultimately was knocked down in favour of the
second petitioner for Rs.835.00 lakhs, for
13
all the three lots put together, in the court
     auction held on 04-02-2004. Thus, official
     liquidator knows, and if he were to say that
     he does not know, should be imputed with
     knowledge that this offer dated 04-12-2003
     for the Land, Buildings and Civil works for
     Rs.101.05 lakhs does not truly and correctly
     represent the value of the Land, Buildings
     and Civil works. In fact, in his letter
     bearing No.OL/AP/RCC.10/ 2001/AR/2004 dated
     04-02-2004    addressed    to    the    second
     petitioner, official liquidator stated:
"With reference to the open auction held on
     4-2-2004 before the Hon'ble High Court of
     Andhra Pradesh, Hyderabad in the matter of
     sale of entire assets of the subject company
     I am to inform you that the Hon'ble High
     Court vide their order dt.4-2-2004 made in
     C.A.No. 736/2003 accepted your offer for the
     purchase of entire assets of the company as
     one Lot i.e., Land & Buildings & Civil Works,
     Plant and Machinery and Current Assets,
     Furniture & Fixtures including Swaraj Mazda
     Vehicle lying at Dusi Village, Srikakulam
     District for a total sale consideration· of
     Rs.8,35,00,000/-. The Hon'ble High Court was
     pleased to grant three months from the date
     of confirmation i.e., 4-2-2004 for making
     balance sale consideration of Rs.6.28 Crores
     as follows:
Yet, the official liquidator, for reasons
     known to him only, mentioned the non-existing
     'offer value' of Rs.101.05 lakhs as the value
     of the Land, Buildings and Civil works, in
     the sale deed.
10. The Court further notes as follows:
“8. In R.C.C.No.10/2001/ AR/2004 dated 05-8-
     2004 sent by him, in reply to the memo
     impugned in W.P.No.16104 of 2004 issued by
14
the third respondent, official liquidator
     stated as follows. "In pursuance of the
     orders of the Hon'ble High Court of Andhra
     Pradesh, Hyderabad in the reference cited, I
     have executed a sale deed dated 05-08-2004,
     in favour of M/s.Dankuni Steels Limited,
     Kolkatta transferring the assets of the
     company M/s.Midwest Iron and Steel Limited,
     Dusi Village, Srikakulam District which is in
     liquidation for Rs.1,01,05,000/- and   signed
     all the connected statements of the said
     document.
11. The learned single Judge thereafter referred to

order passed in C.A. No.1202 of 2004.               Thereafter,

the single Judge found that there would be no doubt

that respondents 1 and 2 M/s. Concast Ispat Limited

were group companies.       Another aspect noted by the

learned Single Judge was the conduct of the second

respondent    filing   Civil    Appeal   No.   823    of   2004

seeking permission of the Court to get the plant and

machinery repaired and overhauled on the basis that

it intended to revive the unit and run it.           An Order,

it   was   noted,   was   passed    thereon    on    06.04.2004

allowing the second respondent to carry out repair

and overhaul operations inter alia subject to certain

conditions.    Next, the learned Single Judge noted the

letter dated 13.08.2004 by the General Manager of the
15
District Industries Centre to the second appellant.

It reads:
"the Commissioner of Industries, Andhra
           Pradesh, Hyderabad informed that M/s.
Concast    Ferro   Inc,    Dusi     Village,
           Amadalavalasa Mandal, Srikakulam District
           who     have      obtained      IEM      No.
           2284/SIA/IMO/2004     dt.25.06.2004      for
           establishing unit for the line of activity
           (1) Pig Iron (2) Granualated slag and (3)
           Coke Fines by acquiring the sick unit
           through official liquidator, High Court of
           Andhra Pradesh as a new Entrepreneur is
           entitled for availing 50% Exemption Duty
           exclusive under NIP 2000-2005 scheme.
Therefore I request you kindly allow
           50% stamp duty, Registration fee and
           transfer   for  loan   agreements,   credit
           deeds, mortgages and hypothecation deeds
           executed by the Industrial Unit in favour
           of banks or financial institutions on
           lands meant for industrial units after
           fulfilling the formalities in terms of
           G.O.Ms.No.103    Revenue     (Registration)
           Department dated 07.02.2001."
12.     The learned Single Judge found that Respondents

1 and 2 were using the plant and machinery for their

business and had no intention to remove and sell them

as scrap or otherwise.            It is further found that if

respondents 1 and 2 were to contend that M/s. Concast

Ferro    Alloys    which    was    obviously    a     mistake   for

M/s.     Concast    Ispat    had       no   concern     with    the
16
respondents 1 and 2, they would not have produced the

letter   dated    13.08.2004    of    the     General   Manager.

After referring to notification GOMS, No. 103 dated

07.02.2001 which we have referred to hereinabove, the

learned Single Judge found that the benefit of the

said G.O. could be claimed only by an industrial unit

and since respondents were claiming benefit under the

G.O. they intended to use the assets of the company

and   had    no   intention    to    remove    the   plant   and

machinery.    Thereafter, the Court found as follows:
“From a combined reading of
Section 3
of
      Transfer of Property Act,
Section 2(6)
of
      Registration Act and
Section 3(26)
of General
      Clauses Act, it is clear that plant and
      machinery of the company, purchased by second
      petitioner    in    court   auction,    also   are
      immovable properties forming part of the land
      and buildings in or on which they are
      located.     In     my    considered      opinion,
      petitioners       claiming      benefit      under
      G.O.Ms.No.103      dated     07.02.2001,     while
      contending that the sale deed in question is
      for Land, Buildings and Civil works only, but
      not    plant     and    machinery,    would     be
      incongruous, because the intention of the
      Government    in    passing   the   above    G.O.,
      obviously, is to give benefit to 'industrial
      units'. It does not enable an owner of an
      'industrial unit' purchasing vacant land,
      claiming benefit of the G.O., just to sell it
      away as plots and make money. The intention
      of    the   government     obviously     is   that
17
'industrial unit' should be established in
     the land and that the land should itself be
     used, for running an 'industrial unit' by the
     purchaser. So, it is clear that the above
     extracted   G.O.   is   meant  to   encourage
     establishment and running of industrial units
     only. Since petitioners are claiming benefit
     of the above extracted G.O. and since they
     also obtained permission from the Court to
     clean and over haul the machinery, it is
     clear that the sale deed in question covers
     not only Land, Buildings and Civil works but
     plant and machinery also.”
13. The Court relied on Duncans Industries Limited v.
State of Uttar Pradesh and others1 and found that

since the property covered by the sale deed covered

not only the land, buildings and civil works, but

plant and machinery also, the value of the plant and

machinery also had to be considered for payment of

stamp duty.      The learned Single Judge found that the

value of the current assets had to be reduced.                  Still

further he found that since the first respondent was

an   industry     and    wanted    to       run   the   unit   as   an

industry,       the     benefit        of     GOMS      103    Revenue

(Registration) Department dated 07.02.2001 could be

extended to it.         Writ Petition No. 10101 of 2004 came

1     (2000) 1 SCC 633
18
to be dismissed with costs.                   Writ Petition No. 19900

of   2004   was     allowed      in     part        and    the   matter   was

remitted    to the       second appellant                 to determine     the

current assets and to deduct their value from Rs.8.35

crores and to reckon the remaining value as the value

of   the    land,    buildings,             civil       works,   plant     and

machinery and collect stamp duty and penalty, if any,

by   extending       the       benefit             of     GOMS   103     dated

07.02.2001.
14. This    led     to   the     two        writ    appeals,     viz.,    Writ

Appeal No. 1873 of 2005 and Writ Appeal No. 2457 of

2005. One of the appeals was filed by the Respondents

1 and 2, viz., Writ Appeal No. 1873 whereas Writ

Appeal No.2457 of 2005 was filed by the appellants.

Both the Appeals were directed against the Judgment

in   Writ   Petition       No.    19900        of       2004.     The    short

reasoning which appealed to the Division Bench and

the relief granted was as follows:
“When we asked the learned Government Pleader
      as to how the petitioner could be forced to
      register even the plant and machinery when
      they only seek registration of the land and
      buildings, Learned Government Pleader would
19
submit that the value of the land and
buildings would be required to be determined
by the Sub-Registrar; and the petitioner's
claim     that     its      value      was     only
Rs.1,01,05,000/- could not be accepted.          As
the petitioner only seeks registration of
land and buildings, and would run the risk of
the plant and machinery not being registered,
the Sub-Registrar cann0t force them to pay
stamp duty on the value of plant and
machinery   when    they    do    not    seek   its
registration. The question whether the value
of these lands and buildings, on the date of
presentation     of     the      document,      was
Rs.1,01,05,000/- or not is a matter which the
Sub-Registrar is required to consider; and it
is on the value of the land and buildings, as
determined by. him, that stamp duty and
registration charges would be required to be
paid subject, of course, to the petitioner's
right to question the order of the Sub-
Registrar before the appellant authority
under the Act. As the petitioner has given up
their claim for 50% exemption and Sri S.
Ravi, learned Senior Counsel, would fairly
state that, if a part of the land sought to
be registered is found to be Government land
it. may be excluded from registration subject
to the petitioner's right to avail their
legal remedies, against any such action,
being left open, we consider it appropriate
to dispose of both the Writ Appeals directing
the    Sub-Registrar       to     consider      the
petitioner's request for registration of the
lands and buildings of the company under
liquidation, purchased by them in the auction
conducted    by   the     Official     Liquidator;
determine    its   value     on    the    date   of
presentation     of      the      document      for
registration; collect the stamp duty and
registration fees thereupon; and, thereafter,
consider   registration     of   the    sale   deed
effecting    transfer    of     the    lands    and
buildings, of the company under liquidation,
20
to the petitioner herein, in accordance with
        law. The entire exercise shall be completed
        at the earliest preferably within three 1
        months from the date of receipt of a copy of
        this order. Both the appeals are disposed of
        accordingly. There shall be no order as to
        costs.   Miscellaneous  petitions,  if  any,
        pending shall stand closed.
SD/- K.GANGADHAR RAO
                                            DEPUTY REGISTRAR
                                               //TRUE COPY//
                                            SECTION OFFICER”
15. Notice was served on respondent no.1 but there is

no appearance. Shri Mahfooz A. Nazki, learned Counsel

appeared on behalf of the appellants. We may notice

that despite time granted to the appellants to effect

service on respondent no.2, in view of their failure

to   effect       service,   in        terms    of   order    dated

04.03.2020, the SLP was found to stand dismissed as

against    Respondent    No.2.     This    is   discernible     from

order     dated   19.06.2020.      Shri    Gopal     Jha,    learned

Counsel appeared on behalf of the third respondent’s

company (in liquidation) represented by the Official

Liquidator.       In view of the fact that there was no

appearance for the first respondent, by order dated
21
20.10.2021,       we    appointed         Shri    S.    Niranjan      Reddy,

learned Senior Counsel as Amicus Curiae.
SUBMISSION OF THE PARTIES
16. We heard the learned counsel as noted, as also

the learned Amicus.
17. Shri     Nazki       would       submit       that        the   impugned

judgment ignores the nature of the transaction, which

culminated    in       the   conveyance          and    the    purpose    for

which the conveyance was made. It is pointed out that

the first respondent had purchased the property with

the intent to carry on the business, which consisted

of   manufacturing        of   the    products          in    question.   He

sought fortification for the same from the support

drawn initially from a Government Order premised on

carrying     on    the       manufacturing             activity     and    to

encourage it, with exemption of 50 per cent offered
22
by the State. He would further point out that the

District Registrar had analysed the facts correctly

and    applied   the   law    laid   down   by   this    Court   in

Duncans Industries Limited (supra). By doing so, the

District   Registrar     had    correctly    found   that    apart

from land, building, and civil works, the plant and

machinery must also be reckoned for the purpose of

computation of stamp duty. He would contend that the

Division Bench had fallen into error in adopting the

reasoning that if the Respondents 1 and 2 did not

want   the registration        of the    plant and      machinery,

they cannot be compelled to do so. He would further

point out that adequate opportunity was afforded to

the respondents by the District Registrar but they

chose not to avail the opportunity.
18. The learned Amicus would, after referring to the

facts,     project      two     issues      as    arising        for

consideration:
23
a.   Whether there is a comprehensive sale of all the

assets     and,    in     a    single         transaction,       is     it

permissible to draw up a conveyance for only a part

of such transaction for seeking registration?
b.   Second issue, according to him, is whether the

Registration Authorities are empowered to go behind

an ostensible instrument and ascertain the stamp duty

payable on the actual transaction?
19. He     took   us    to     the        definition      of   the    word

‘instrument’      in    the
Stamp       Act,    1899
(hereinafter

referred    to    as,   “the    Act”).        He   further     drew    our

attention    to Section        47A introduced          by the        Andhra

Pradesh (Amendment) Act of 1971. That apart, he also

pointed out that by Andhra Pradesh Act (8 of 1988), a

proviso has been inserted in
Section 27
of the Act,

which we shall advert to. He further pointed out that

the triumvirate of
Sections 4
,
5
, and
6
of the Act,
24
has been succinctly explained by this Court in the

decision   reported      in
Member,      Board     of   Revenue    v.

Arthur Paul Benthall2
. He would, on the strength of

the law laid down therein contend that the destiny of

this case would be governed by
Section 5
of the Act.

He would contend that there is only one instrument in

this case, i.e., the deed of conveyance, and since

more than one matter, as expounded by this Court,

exists in substance, there would be justification for

the   Authorities      having         regard     to     the   powers

available,     in particular,         in
Section      27
after    the

insertion of the proviso therein and Section 47A. He

would point out that the preambular recitals in the

conveyance,    convey a     version which         may not     square

with the actual recitals and the purported terms of

the operative part read with the Schedule. In other

words,   the   auction    sale    in    favour     of   the   second

respondent-auction purchaser, indicates that the sale

was of assets of the company in liquidation, such as

land, building, plant and machinery and other assets.




2     AIR 1956 SC 35
25
The total sale consideration is stated to be Rs.8.35

crores.
20. According to the learned Amicus, the Authorities

are competent to verify the preambular recitals in

Clauses    (D),    (F)   and    (H)    along     with    the    entire

recitals,     to    ascertain         whether     the    instrument

purports    to provide       for a     larger transaction           than

projected in the Schedule. He would no doubt point

out that the earlier view of judicial review in these

matters     favoured     a     very    limited     power       to   the

registering       authority     in     traversing       beyond       the

document (See
Himalaya Space House Company Limited v.

Chief Controlling Revenue Authority3
).              He would point

out   subsequent       legislative      changes     by     different

legislatures which included Section 47A as also the

insertion of the proviso to
Section 27
by the Andhra

Pradesh Amending Act (Act 8 of 1988), has expanded

the power of the authority.
He would contend that

such an exercise would have the blessing of the law
laid down in
Duncans Industries Limited
(supra) and


3     (1972) 1 SCC 726
26
also     the    view        taken    by           this      Court       in
Chief

Controlling         Revenue       Authority            v.    Coastal         Gujarat

Power Ltd.
and others4. The Authorities could verify

the true extent and market value of the specified

immovable property. The power flows from
Section 27
and
Section       47A
of    the        Act.      He    would       draw     our

attention to the definition of the word ‘immovable

property’ in the
Registration Act, 1908
, the
General

Clauses Act, 1897
and the
Transfer of Property Act,

1882
.     He    would      also     point         to
Section        8
of   the

Transfer       of     Property      Act,          1882,      as     a       relevant

provision, which sheds light and which should guide

the Officer.         The Authorities can and must break down

the transaction or the instrument and demarcate the

distinct matters and assess the matters separately

and    charge       the    aggregate         of    the      stamp    duty      under
Section     5
of      the Act.           He       would submit              that the

registering          authority          is         entitled         to        verify

statements in D, F and H in conjunction with entire

recitals to ascertain, if the instrument purported to

provide for a larger transaction than seen projected


4       (2015) 10 SCC 700
27
in     the   schedule.     Further,    the    appellant   could

ascertain     by any     measures indicated     in
Section   27
read with Section 47A as to whether the immovable

property is wholly and properly described.             This may

include an exercise of verifying whether there is any

embedded plant and machinery that ought to have been

shown as immovable property and was wrongly excluded.

He     pointed     out   that   the    original     transaction

comprised the sale of all the following categories of

assets of the company in liquidation.               They are as

follows:
A.Land and Building – which is immovable property.
B.Plant      and   Machinery    that    may    be   permanently

     embedded to the earth and answering the description

     of immovable property as defined.
C.Plant and Machinery and other effects which may not

     come under the description of immovable property

     and hence constitute movable property.
28
D.Current Assets and Motor Vehicle which are movable

    property.
21. He would point out that there were four distinct

matters which were comprised in the composite sale.
22. The       third     respondent         is     the        Company       in

liquidation      represented        by    Official      Liquidator.          A

Counter Affidavit has been filed in this Court. It

is, inter alia, disclosed that based on the Order of

the High Court, a Valuation Report was obtained from

a   Valuer.     According     to    the    Valuation         Report,       the

land,    building       and   civil       works       were    valued       at

Rs.4013000/-.      Plant      and     machinery       were        valued    at

Rs.6,22,10,000/-.        That       apart,      raw    materials         were

valued at Rs.15,00,000/- and furniture, etc., were

valued at Rs.3,50,000/-. A Valuation Report was also

submitted on behalf of the Canara Bank wherein the

value   was     shown    as     Rs.      25,10,275/-         as    FMV     and

Rs.1510705/-       as     disposal         value.       The        Official
29
Liquidator      proceeded to        set the    value, taking         the

value as indicated hereinbefore, given by the Valuer,

in regard to land, building and civil works and plant

and    machinery.     The    current      assets,    raw    materials,

furniture      and fittings        were shown       as carrying      the

value of Rs.43,60,000/-. The second respondent herein

made the highest offer of Rs.8,35,00,000/- for the

properties of the company as a lot.                  Shri Gopal Jha

would, in fact, point out that the High Court had

made    it    clear   that       while   permitting    the    sale   in

favour of the first respondent the stamp duty would

be    as     determined     by    the    authority    and    that    the

liquidator could not be blamed.
30
ANALYSIS
23.   The   expression   “instrument”   is   defined   under
Section 2(14)
of the Act as under:
“(14) "instrument" includes--
(a) every document, by which any right or
        liability is, or purports to be, created,
        transferred,       limited,     extended,
        extinguished or recorded;
(b) a document, electronic or otherwise,
        created for a transaction in a stock
        exchange or depository by which any right
        or liability is, or purports to be,
        created, transferred, limited, extended,
        extinguished or recorded; and
(c) any other        document   mentioned      in
        Schedule I,

              but    does    not    include  such
              instruments as may be specified by
              the Government, by notification in
              the Official Gazette.”
24.
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the Act must be noticed

and they read as follows:
31
“3. Instruments chargeable with duty. —
Subject to the provisions of this Act and the
exemptions contained in Schedule I, the
following instruments shall be chargeable
with duty of the amount indicated in that
Schedule    as    the    proper    duty    therefore
respectively, that is to say—
(a)   every    instrument     mentioned     in  that
Schedule which, not having been previously
executed by any person, is executed in India
on or after the first day of July, 1899;
(b) every bill of exchange payable otherwise
than on demand] or promissory note drawn or
made out of India on or after that day and
accepted or paid, or presented for acceptance
or payment, or endorsed, transferred or
otherwise negotiated, in India; and
c) every instrument (other than a bill of
exchange, or promissory note) mentioned in
that   Schedule,      which,    not   having    been
previously     executed    by    any    person,   is
executed out of India on or after that day,
relates to any property situate, or to any
matter or thing done or to be done, in India
and is received in India:
Provided that no duty shall be chargeable in
respect of—
(1) any instrument executed by, or on behalf
of, or in favour of, the Government in cases
where, but for this exemption, the Government
would be liable to pay the duty chargeable in
respect of such instrument;
(2) any instrument for the sale, transfer or
other disposition, either absolutely or by
way of mortgage or otherwise, of any ship or
vessel, or any part, interest, share or
property of or in any ship or vessel
registered under the
Merchant Shipping Act
1894, Act No. 57 & 58 Vict. c. 60 or under
Act XIX of 1838 Act No. or the Indian
Registration of Ships Act, 1841, (CX of 1841)
as amended by subsequent Acts.
32
4.   Several   instruments    used   in  single
     transaction of sale, mortgage or settlement.
     — (1) Where, in the case of any sale,
     mortgage or settlement, several instruments
     are employed for completing the transaction,
     the   principal   instrument   only   shall  be
     chargeable   with   the   duty   prescribed  in
     Schedule I, for the conveyance, mortgage or
     settlement, and each of the other instruments
     shall be chargeable with a duty of one rupee
     instead of the duty (if any) prescribed for
     it in that Schedule.
(2) The parties may determine for themselves
     which of the instrument so employed shall,
     for the purposes of sub-section (1), be
     deemed to be the principal instrument:
Provided that the duty chargeable on the
     instrument so determined shall be the highest
     duty which would be chargeable in respect of
     any of the said instruments employed.
5. Instruments relating to several distinct
     matters. — Any instrument comprising or
     relating to several distinct matters shall be
     chargeable with the aggregate amount of the
     duties with which separate instruments, each
     comprising or relating to one of such
     matters, would be chargeable under this Act.”
25. The next relevant provision is
Section 27
of the

Indian Stamp Act.
“27. Facts affecting duty to be set forth in
     instrument. —The consideration (if any) and
     all other facts and circumstances affecting
     the chargeability of any instrument with
33
duty, or the amount of the duty with which it
     its chargeable, shall be fully and truly set
     forth therein.”
26. Vide Andhra Pradesh Amendment Act 8 of 1988, the

following proviso was added to
Section 27
:
“Provided  that   a   registering  officer
     appointed under the
Registration Act, 1908
or
     any other officer authorised in this behalf,
     may inspect the property, which is the
     subject matter of such instrument, make
     necessary local enquiries, call for and
     examine all the connected records and satisfy
     that the provisions of this section are
     complied with.”
27. The    next     relevant   provision    is     Section    47A

inserted   by     Andhra   Pradesh   (Amendment)    Act,     which

reads as follows:
“47-A.   Instruments  of   conveyance,   etc.,
     under-vaulted how to the dealt with: - (1)
     where the registering officer appointed under
     the
Registration Act, 1908
, (Central Act 16
     of 1908), while registering any instrument of
     conveyance,    exchange,    gift    partition,
     settlement, release , agreement relating to
     construction, development or sale of any
     immovable property or power of attorney given
     for sale, development of immovable property,
     has reason to believe that the market value
     of the property which is the subject matter
     or such instrument has not been truly
     setforth in the instrument, or that the value
34
arrived at by him as per the guidelines
prepared adopted by the parties, he may keep
pending such instrument, and refer the matter
to the Collector for determination of the
market value of the property and the proper
duty payable thereon:
Provided that no reference shall be made by
the registering officer unless an amount
equal to fifty percent of the deficit duty
arrived at by him is deposited by the party
concerned.
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub
section (1), the Collector shall after giving
the parties an opportunity of making their
representation and after holding an enquiry
in such manner as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act, determine the market
value of the property which is the subject
matter of such instrument and the duty as
aforesaid:
Provided that no appeal shall be preferred
unless and until the difference, if any, in
the amount of duty is paid by the person
liable to pay the same, after deducting the
amount already deposited by him. Provided
further that where after the determination of
market value by the Collector, if the stamp
duty borne by the instrument is found
sufficient the amount deposited shall be
returned to the person concerned without
interest.
(3) the Collector may suo motu within two
year from the date of registration of such
instrument, not already referred to him under
sub section (1), call for an examine the
instrument for the purpose of satisfying
35
himself as to the correctness of the market
value of the property which is the subject
matter of such instrument and the duty
payable    thereon    and   if,    after   such
examination, he has reason to believe that
market value of such property has not been
truly set forth in the instrument, he may
determine the market value of such property
and the duty as aforesaid in accordance with
the procedure provided for in subsection (2).
The difference, if any in the amount of duty,
shall be payable by the person liable to pay
the duty: Provided that noting in this sub-
section   shall    apply  to   any   instrument
registered before the date of commencement of
the India Stamp (Andhra Pradesh Amendment)
act, 1971.
(3-A) (i) The Inspector General may suo motu,
call for and examine the record of any order
passed    or    proceeding   recorded   by   the
Collector under subSection (3), and if such
order or proceeding recorded is found leading
to   loss    of   legitimate   revenue   due  to
disregard of market value by the Collector,
based on mistake, omission, or failure to
take any factual evidence effecting the
market value of the property, may make such
enquiry or cause such enquiry and inspection
of the property to be made and subject to the
provisions     of   this   Act,   may   initiate
proceedings to revise, modify or set aside
such order or proceeding and may pass such
order in reference thereto as he thinks fit
determining       the    market     value    and
corresponding deficit stamp duty: Provided
that the powers conferred under this clause
shall be invoked within a period of six
months from the date of the order or
36
proceeding issued by the Collector under sub-
section (3);
(ii) The power under clause (I) shall not be
exercised by the authority specified therein
in respect of any issue or question which is
the subject matter of an appeal before, or
which was decided on appeal by the appellate
authority under sub-section (5);
(iii) no order shall be passed under Clause
(I) enhancing any duty unless an opportunity
has been given to the party to show cause
against the proposed revision of market value
and deficit stamp duty;
(iv) where any action under this sub-section
has been deferred on account of any stay
order granted by the Court in any case, or by
reason of the fact that another proceeding is
pending before the Court involving a question
of law having a direct bearing on the order
or proceeding in question, the period during
which the stay order was in force or each
proceeding was pending shall be excluded in
computing the period of six months specified
in the proviso to clause (I) of this section
for the purposes of exercising the power
under this sub-section.
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order of the
Collector under sub-section (2) or sub-
section (3) may appeal to the appellate
authority specified in sub-section (5). All
such appeals shall be preferred within such
time and shall be heard and disposed of in
such manner, as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act.
37
(4A) Any person aggrieved by the order of the
Inspector General under subsection (3A) may
appeal to the High Court within a period of
two months from the date of receipt of such
order.
(5) The appellate authority shall be---
(i)   in   the   cities   of   Hyderabad   and
Secunderabad, the City Civil Court,
(ii) elsewhere— (a) the Subordinate Judge or
if there are more than one Subordinate Judge,
the   Principal  Subordinate   Judge,  having
jurisdiction over the area in which the
property concerned is situated; or
(b) if there is no such Subordinate Judge,
the District Judge having jurisdiction over
the area aforesaid.
(6) For the purpose of this Act, market value
of any property shall be estimated to be the
price which in the opinion of the Collector
or the appellate authority, as the case may
be, such property would have fetched or would
fetch if sold in the open market on the date
of execution of any instrument referred to in
sub-section (1);
Provided that in respect of instruments
executed by or on behalf of the Central
Government or the State Government or any
authority or body incorporate by or under any
law for the time being in force and wholly
owned by Central/state Government, the market
value of any property shall be the value
shown in such instrument.”
38
28. Now, we must notice the definition of the word

‘immovable property’ in the Registration Act, General

Clauses Act, and the Transfer of Property Act. We

must also advert to
Section 8
of the Transfer of

Property Act:
“In   the    Registration    Act, 1908,   the
     definition is;
“1(6) “Immovable Property” includes land,
     buildings, hereditary allowances, rights to
     ways, lights, ferries, fisheries or any other
     benefit to arise out of land, and things
     attached   to   the   earth,   or permanently
     fastened to anything which is attached to the
     earth, but not standing timber, growing crops
     nor grass;
In the General Clauses Act, 1897
it reads:
“3(26) “immovable property” shall include
     land, benefits to arise out of land, and
     things attached to the earth, or permanently
     fastened to anything attached to the earth;
Transfer of Property Act
, 1882
3. …
     “immoveable   property”   does   not   include
     standing timber, growing crops or grass;
“instrument”,    means   a    non-testamentary
     instrument;
Section 8
of Transfer of Property Act, 1882

     “8. Operation of transfer.—Unless a different
     intention   is   expressed   or    necessarily
     implied,  a   transfer  of   property   passes
     forthwith to the transferee all the interest
39
which the transferor is then capable of
       passing in the property, and in the legal
       incidents thereof. Such incidents include,
       where the property is land, the easements
       annexed   thereto,   the  rents  and   profits
       thereof accruing after the transfer, and all
       things attached to the earth; and, where the
       property is machinery attached to the earth,
       the moveable parts thereof; and, where the
       property is a house, the easements annexed
       thereto, the rent thereof accruing after the
       transfer, and the locks, keys, bars, doors,
       windows and all other things provided for
       permanent use therewith; and, where the
       property is a debt or other actionable claim,
       the securities therefor (except where they
       are also for other debts or claims not
       transferred to the transferee), but not
       arrears   of   interest  accured  before   the
       transfer; and, where the property is money or
       other property yielding income, the interest
       or income thereof accruing after the transfer
       takes effect.”
29.
In
Member, Board of Revenue
(supra), this Court

had the occasion to expound the law by interpreting
Sections 3
,
4
, and
5
of the Indian Stamp Act. In the

said    case,   the   Respondent   therein   had    executed   a

power of attorney. The power of attorney countenanced

power being conferred on the agent by the respondent

in     his   individual   capacity    and    also    in   other

capacities such as trustee, etc. The question which
40
inter alia fell for decision was whether the word

‘matter’   in
Section   5
was    to   be   conflated   with

category. It is necessary to notice what the majority

of this Court held:
“4. We are unable to accept the contention
     that the word “matter” in
Section 5
was
     intended to convey the same meaning as the
     word “description” in
Section 6
. In its
     popular   sense,  the   expression   “distinct
     matters” would connote something different
     from distinct “categories”. Two transactions
     might be of the same description, but all the
     same, they might be distinct. If A sells
     Black-acre   to X and   mortgages   White-acre
     to Y, the transactions fall under different
     categories,   and  they   are  also   distinct
     matters.    But   if A mortgages    Black-acre
     to X and mortgages White-acre to Y, the two
     transactions fall under the same category,
     but they would certainly be distinct matters.
     If the intention of the legislature was that
     the expression ‘distinct matters’ in
Section
     5
should be understood not in its popular
     sense but narrowly as meaning different
     categories in the Schedule, nothing would
     have been easier than to say so. When two
     words of different import are used in a
     statute in two consecutive provisions, it
     would be difficult to maintain that they are
     used in the same sense, and the conclusion
     must follow that the expression “distinct
     matters” in
Section 5
and “descriptions” in
Section 6
have different connotations.
xxx                    xxx           xxx
41
7. The error in this argument lies in
     thinking that the object and scope of
Sections 4
to
6
are the same, which in fact
     they are not.
Section 4
deals with a single
     transaction completed in several instruments,
     and
Section 6
with a single transaction which
     might be viewed as falling under more than
     one category, whereas
Section 5
applies only
     when the instrument comprises more than one
     transaction, and it is immaterial for this
     purpose whether those transactions are of the
     same category or of different categories. The
     topics dealt with in the three sections being
     thus different, no useful purpose will be
     served by referring to
Section 4
or
Section 6
for determining the scope of
Section 5
or for
     construing its terms. It is not without
     significance that the legislature has used
     three different words in relation to the
     three sections, “transaction” in
Section 4
,
     “matter” in
Section 5
, and “description” in
Section 6
.”
30.
In the Judgment of this Court in
Himalaya Space

House Company Limited
(supra), this Court was dealing

with the case under the Act containing
Section 27
sans the proviso added by the Andhra Pradesh Act.

Paragraph 11 of the judgment reads as under:
“11. It was urged that in view of
Section 27
of the Stamp Act, it was permissible for the
     Revenue to look into the terms and conditions
     of the agreements entered into by Uttamchand
42
with the various persons to whom he had
    assigned    flats,    offices    and    shops,
    particularly in view of the fact that the
    impounded document makes reference to those
    agreement. We are not able to accept that
    contention.
Section 27
prescribes that “The
    consideration (if any) and all other facts
    and circumstances affecting the chargeability
    of any instrument with duty, or the amount of
    the duty with which it is chargeable shall be
    fully and truly set forth therein”. It is
    true that in view of this provision, the
    parties to a document are required to set
    forth in the document fully and truly the
    consideration (if any) and all other facts
    and circumstances affecting the chargeability
    of that document with the duty or the amount
    of the duty with which it is chargeable. But
    a failure to comply with the requirements of
    that section is merely punishable under
Section 64
of the Stamp Act. No provision in
    the
Stamp Act
empowers the Revenue to make an
    independent inquiry of the value of the
    property conveyed for determining the duty
    chargeable.
Article 23
is the article that
    governs the charging of stamp duty on
    “conveyance”. That article to the extent
    relevant for our present purpose reads:
“23. Conveyance as defined by
Section 2(10)
not being a transfer charge or exempted under
Section 52
. Where the amount or value of the
    consideration for such conveyance as set
    forth therein….”

                              (emphasis supplied)
31. In other words, the Court apparently approved of

the view taken that the Court should look at the
43
instrument as it stood (see ILR 27 Bom 279 referred

to in para 12).
32.
Duncans       Industries        Limited
(supra)       is   a   case

which    arose    under       the
Registration          Act,    1908
and
Section 47A
of the Act [Section 47A considered in the

case     was     an        amendment        by    the     Uttar       Pradesh

Legislature].         It involved a transfer on “as is where

is” basis and “as a going concern” of a fertilizer

business in favour of the appellant company.                              This

was    preceded       by    an    agreement       which     involved      also

expressly the transfer of plant and machinery.                            The

Collector levied stamp duty and penalty on the basis

that since the transfer contemplated the sale of the

unit as a going concern, the intention of the Vendor

was    to   transfer        all    properties       in    the    fertilizer

business in question.               The High court had held that

the    machineries         which    formed       fertilizer       plant    was

permanently embedded in the earth with an intention

of     running    the       factory.        It   was     found    that     the

machineries       were        immovable          property       which     were
44
permanently attached to the earth.      Para 8 of
the

said judgment
reads as under:
“8. … The question whether a machinery which
     is embedded in the earth is moveable property
     or an immovable property, depends upon the
     facts   and   circumstances    of   each   case.
     Primarily, the court will have to take into
     consideration the intention of the parties
     (sic party) when it decided to embed the
     machinery,    whether   such    embedment    was
     intended to be temporary or permanent. A
     careful perusal of the agreement of sale and
     the conveyance deed along with the attendant
     circumstances and taking into consideration
     the nature of machineries involved clearly
     shows that the machineries which have been
     embedded in the earth to constitute a
     fertilizer plant in the instant case, are
     definitely embedded permanently with a view
     to utilise the same as a fertilizer plant.
     The description of the machines as seen in
     the   schedule   attached   to    the  deed   of
     conveyance also shows without any doubt that
     they were set up permanently in the land in
     question with a view to operate a fertilizer
     plant and the same was not embedded to
     dismantle and remove the same for the purpose
     of sale as machinery at any point of time.
     The facts as could be found also show that
     the purpose for which these machines were
     embedded was to use the plant as a factory
     for the manufacture of fertilizer at various
     stages of its production………

     “10. The next question for consideration is
     whether the vendor did transfer the title of
     the plant and machinery in the instant case
45
by the conveyance deed dated 9-6-1994. Here
again, it is imperative to ascertain the
intention of the parties from the material
available on record. While ascertaining the
intention of the parties, we cannot preclude
the contents of the agreement pursuant to
which the conveyance deed in question has
come into existence. We have noticed that as
per the agreement it is clear that what was
agreed to be sold is the entire business of
fertilizer on an “as is where is” basis
including the land, building thereon, plant
and machinery relating to fertilizer business
— description of which is found in the
definition of the term “fertilizer business”
in the agreement itself which has been
extracted by us hereinabove. It is not the
case of the appellant when it contends that
the possession of plant and machinery was
handed over separately to the appellant by
the vendor, that these machineries were
dismantled and given to the appellant, nor is
it possible to visualise from the nature of
the plant that is involved in the instant
case that such a possession dehors the land
could be    given by    the vendor    to the
appellant. It is obviously to reduce the
market value of the property the document in
question is attempted to be drafted as a
conveyance deed regarding the land only. The
appellant had embarked upon a methodology by
which it purported to transfer the possession
of the plant and machinery separately and is
contending   now  that   this  handing   over
possession of the machinery is dehors the
conveyance deed. We are not convinced with
this argument. Apart from the recitals in the
agreement of sale, it is clear from the
46
recitals in the conveyance deed itself that
what is conveyed under the deed dated 9-6-
1994 is not only the land but the entire
fertilizer   business  including   plant   and
machinery. A perusal of clauses 10, 11 and 13
of the said deed shows that it is the
fertilizer factory which the vendor had
agreed to transfer along with its business as
a going concern and to complete the same the
conveyance   deed   in  question   was   being
executed. There is implicit reference to the
sale of fertilizer factory as a going concern
in the conveyance deed itself….”
11. Learned counsel for the appellant has
placed for our consideration a judgment of
this Court in the case of Himalaya House Co.
Ltd. v. Chief       Controlling        Revenue
Authority
[(1972) 1 SCC 726] to contend that
a mere reference to an earlier agreement does
not amount to incorporation of the terms and
conditions of an earlier transaction or the
intention of the parties. We have carefully
considered
the said judgment
and, in our
opinion, that judgment does not in any manner
lay down the law in absolute terms that a
court cannot look into prior agreements while
considering the intention of the parties for
finding out what actually is the property
that is conveyed under the deed under
consideration. It is again based on facts of
that case that this Court came to the
conclusion therein that the so-called terms
and conditions which were found in an earlier
agreement    were   not    intended   to    be
incorporated in the subsequent document….
47
13. For the reasons stated above, we are of
      the considered opinion that the vendor as per
      the   conveyance   deed   dated   9-6-1994   has
      conveyed the title it had not only in regard
      to the land in question but also to the
      entire fertilizer business on “as is where
      is”   condition   including    the   plant   and
      machinery   standing    on   the    said   land.
Therefore, the authorities below were totally
      justified in taking into consideration the
      value of these plant and machineries along
      with the value of the land for the purpose of
      the Act.”
                                  (Emphasis supplied)
33.
In
Chief Controlling Revenue Authority
(supra),

the respondent secured financial assistance from a

few lenders who formed a consortium and executed an

agreement appointing one bank as its lead trustee.

The respondent executed the mortgage with the lead

trustee.    The Revenue contended that the respondent

had   availed    assistance        from    13    lenders    and,

therefore, it was required to execute the mortgage

deed in respect of 13 lenders. Thus, in substance the

single   mortgage   deed   with    the    lead   trustee   was   a

combination of 13 mortgages.         This Court noted, inter

alia, that the instrument of mortgage had come into
48
existence only after separate loan agreements were

entered into by the borrower with regard to separate

loans    advanced.
The    Court      drew    inspiration         from
Member, Board of Revenue
(supra) and held that had

the borrowers entered into separate mortgage deeds

with the 13 financial institutions there would have

been a separate documents.                It was consequently found

that the single mortgage must be treated as dealing

with distinct matters within the meaning of
Section 5
of the Act and justified the stand of the Revenue.
34. We    have      set   out    the       Preamble    and       also   the

recitals in the sale deed. This is besides capturing

the background leading up to the execution of the

sale    deed   in    favour     of   the    first     respondent.       The

second    respondent         was,     undoubtedly,         the     auction

purchaser. The auction sale related to the assets of

the company, which included the land, the building,

the plant and machinery and other assets. The vendee,

who    under   the    sale    deed     is   the    first     respondent,

being the nominee of the second respondent. It has
49
been recited in Clause (H) that the vendee has paid

the    full    consideration.       More    significantly,       it    is

stated therein also that as per the terms of the sale

properties have been sold by the vendor to the vendee

on ‘as is where is whatever there is basis’.                          The

total sale consideration, it is clear again from the

sale deed itself, is Rs.8.35 crores, for the land,

building,      civil       works,   plant      and    machinery       and

current assets, etc. However, what had been done is

an    amount    of    Rs.10105000/-      has   been    taken    as    the

value of the land, building and civil works based on

the offer received by the Liquidator, when the assets

were    put    up    for   sale   individually.       It   is   further

stated that the purchaser has agreed to pay the stamp

duty/registration fees/transfer fees as per the value

derived by the Sub-Registrar. This last statement is

traceable to order dated 15.06.2004 passed in civil

Appeal 1202 of 2004 which we have referred to in

paragraph 6.         A copy of the said order is enclosed

with the sale deed. It is further stated that the 46

acres and a few cents was ‘now’ registered in favour

of the vendee.             In the Recital Clause, thereafter,
50
what has been purported to be done is that it is

shown     that    the    vendors          have    sold,     transferred,

conveyed, alienated, assigned to the vendee all the

scheduled property. The matter does not end there.

The aforesaid recital is followed up with the words

‘along    with    all    the     rights,     easements,          interests,

etc., the rights which ordinarily passed on through

such sale on and over the said land in favour of the

vendee and to hold and enjoy the same as absolute

owner. In the Schedule, no doubt, what is mentioned

is   46 acres      and a       little over        71 cents.        We have

already    referred      to    the     conduct      of    the    first    and

second    respondents,         which      commended       itself    to    the

learned Single Judge as conveying the impression that

they    wanted    to    repair    and      maintain       the    plant    and

machinery.       Furthermore,        they    have    also       sought    the

benefit    of     the   exemption         provided       under    GoMS    103

dated 07.02.2001, which Government Order purported to

provide     for    certain       concessions         in    the     form    of

exemption    from stamp         duty and         registration fee          in

favour of industrial units. We are in agreement with

the view taken by the learned Single Judge that the
51
unit was purported to be operated as a going concern

and apparently the first respondent did not intend to

dispose of the plant and machinery as scrap. Bearing

in   mind    this    context,   we      proceed      to   examine    the

exigibility of the plant and machinery to stamp duty

under the Act.
35. We have referred to
Sections 3
,
4
and
5
of the

Act.    We   have    also   adverted      to   the    interpretation

traced on the same by this Court in
Member, Board of

Revenue
(supra). The learned Amicus would submit that

plant    and       machinery    would      constitute        ‘distinct

matters’ within the meaning of
Section 5
of the Act.

To   put it    differently, distinct           matters are         dealt

with    in   one    instrument,        viz.,   the    sale    deed    in

question. If different instruments had been executed

purporting     to     convey    land,      building,       plant     and

machinery, it would be the aggregate of the value of

such matters, which would have exposed them to duty.

If instead of separate instruments, distinct matters

are made subject matter of one instrument, then, it
52
would hardly matter and the liability to pay duty

would be still found within the four walls of
Section

5
of the Act.
36. It is, no doubt, true that what is purported to

be    conveyed,    going    by   the    Recital     Clause,    is,    at

first blush, the land as comprised in the Schedule,

viz., 46 and odd acres. What is conveyed is immovable

property. Immovable property has been defined in the
General    Clauses       Act,    1897
as     ‘including        land,

benefits to arrive out of land and things attached to

the    earth      or    permanently      fastened      to     anything

attached    to     the     earth’.      When   it    comes    to     the

definition of ‘immovable property’ in the
Transfer of

Property Act
, it has been defined as ‘not including

standing    timber,      growing     crops     or   grass’.
In    the

Registration Act, 1908
, immovable property includes,

apart from land and buildings, things attached to the

earth or permanently fastened to anything which is

attached    to    the    earth   but     not   including      standing

timber, growing crops or grass. Most importantly, we
53
cannot    also      be    oblivious     that
Section      8
of     the

Transfer of Property Act declares that in the absence

of an express or implied indication, a transfer of

property passes to the transferee all the interests,

which the transferor was capable of passing in the

property    and in        the legal       incidents thereof.               Such

incidents includes, inter alia, where the property is

land,    all    things     attached     to       the   earth.       When   the

property       is   machinery     attached        to   the   earth,         the

movable parts thereof also are comprehended in the

transfer.
37. In the Recital Clause, a proper reading of the

same would tend to indicate that what is conveyed is

rights over the scheduled property, which, no doubt,

is the land, as described in the Schedule but it

includes all the rights, easements, interests, etc.,

i.e., the rights which ordinarily passed on such sale

over the land. It is from a reading the said recital

in   conjunction         with
Section      8
of   the   Transfer       of

Property Act that the intention of the parties become
54
self-evident that the vendor intended to convey, all

things, which inter alia stood attached to the earth.

The mere fact that there is no express reference to

plant and machinery in the Recital Clause cannot mean

that the interest in the plant and machinery which

stood attached to the land, which was scheduled, was

not conveyed to the first respondent. The value of,

what was actually purchased, has been expressly set

out in the Preamble to the sale deed. The value has

been reflected as Rs.8.35 crores. The sum of Rs.8.35

crores had been, in unambiguous terms, indicated as

the total sale consideration for the asset sold to

the first respondent, comprising of land, building,

civil works, plant and machinery and current assets,

etc. The first respondent has taken out the value of

the land, building and civil works, and shown it at

Rs.10105000/-,   and   then   indicating   only   the   said

amount as value. This is apparently to tide over the

liability to stamp duty for what was actually, in

law, conveyed to the first respondent. The Division

Bench appears to have proceeded on the basis that the

first appellant could not force Respondents 1 and 2
55
to   pay stamp       duty on     the value       of the       plant and

machinery, when they do not seek its registration. As

respondents 1 and 2 had given up their claim for

exemption based on the Government Order, the Division

Bench      accepted     the     same.          The     Division      Bench

overlooked the nature of the transaction, the effect

of   the    auction     sale,   the     property       sold   and    their

value, and the fact that the Company Judge had by

order dated 15.06.2004 left it open to the authority

to determine the liability.               The Division Bench did

not consider the preambular part.                    It also failed to

bear       in   mind     the     power     available          with     the

authorities.
38. The effort of respondents 1 and 2 was to avoid

payment of the stamp duty as due in law. The Division

Bench erred in not noticing the true purport of the

sale    deed    in     conjunction      with
Section       8
of   the

Transfer of Property Act and the definition of the

word ‘immovable property’, which we have adverted to.

Viewed in the context of
Duncans Industries Limited
56
(supra) and
Member, Board of Revenue
(supra), as also

the other attendant facts, including the contents of

the Preambular portion, as also the conduct of the

Respondents 1 and 2, it would be clear that the sale

deed operated to convey the rights over the plant and

machinery as well, which was comprised in the land

scheduled in the sale deed. As far as the plant and

machinery    is concerned,         it must,     however, be      only

such    plant    and   machinery,       which    was    permanently

embedded to the earth and answering the description

of the immovable property as defined. It would appear

that such an inquiry was not done to ascertain the

same by the appellants.
39. The proviso to
Section 27
of the Act, added by

the Andhra Pradesh Amending Act (8 of 1988), does

empower    the Officer       to inspect     the property,        make

local    inquiries     in    the   facts,   call    for   connected

records, examine them and satisfy that the provisions

of
Section   27
are     complied     with.
Section   27
,

undoubtedly, provides that the consideration, if any,
57
and the other facts and circumstances, affecting the

chargeability     of    any    instrument           or    the   amount      of

duty, must be fully and correctly set forth. Equally,

Section 47A of the Andhra Pradesh Amending Act (8 of

1988), empowers the Registering Officer to deal with

undervalued     instruments.         We      have    adverted        to    the

provision and it provides for an elaborate procedure

to deal with the problem of undervaluation. It may be

true that
Section 27
of the Act read with
Section 64
,

as    interpreted      in
Himalaya        Space       House      Company

Limited
(supra), was understood as meaning only that

failure   to comply         with
Section        27
, was         punishable

under
Section 64
. The Court, in the said case, in

fact, noted the absence of any provision, empowering

the   Revenue    to    make     an     independent          inquiry        for

determining     the    value    of     the    property.
As   far   as

Andhra Pradesh is concerned, with the addition of the

proviso to
Section 27
, power has been conferred on

the   Authority, which         was found        conspicuous by             its

absence   in
Himalaya       Space      House          Company     Limited
(supra). This is besides
Section 47A
of the Act.
58
40. We would think that the learned Amicus is right

in     pointing        out        that     in        the     nature      of     the

transaction,          and    what        was        actually     sold    by     the

Official       Liquidator,         plant        and    machinery,       such     as

would answer the description of immovable property,

must    also    be     found       part        of    the    property     for    the

purpose of the stamp duty and other charges as per

law.
41. There are two aspects, which remain. Firstly, as

noted    by     us,     on    account           of    the    default     of     the

appellants        to        effect        service           on    the        second

respondent,       the       SLP    stood        dismissed.       We,    however,

notice that, at the request of the second respondent,

the    Company       Court     ordered          that       the   sale   deed     be

executed in favour of its nominee, viz., the first

respondent. The first respondent, accordingly, became

the    vendee    under       the     sale        deed.      It   is    the    first

respondent, which is liable in law as vendee to pay

the stamp duty. Therefore, we would think that the
59
absence    of   the    second       respondent,      may    not    affect

passing of an order as against the first respondent,

which, as the vendee, is the entity liable to bear

the liability towards stamp duty.                 Another aspect is

that the matter may have to go back to consider the

actual    plant     and      machinery      as   would      answer    the

description       of    immovable         property     as     correctly

pointed out by the learned Amicus. The passage of

time may have its bearing. But it may have to be

carried out.
42. As    noticed       by    us,     the   appellants       had     also

appealed against the Judgment of the learned Single

Judge. The Single Judge, it must be remembered, while

upholding the Order of the second appellant (District

Registrar) in regard to the value of the plant and

machinery, had directed deducting the value of the

current    assets      and    also    directed    making      available

benefits of GoMS 103 dated 07.02.2001. Apparently,

Respondents 1 and 2 in the Appeal gave up their claim

to the exemption on the basis that they succeeded in

having    the sale      deed registered          without having        to
60
include the value of plant and machinery before the

Division     Bench. The    stand of      the appellants         would

appear to be that GoMS 103 dated 07.02.2001 applied

to new industrial units other than those listed as

ineligible under GoMS 9 dated 05.01.2001. It appears

to be their case that the subject industry is a mini

steel industry and mini steel industry plants were

not    eligible    and   the   item    appears    as    Item    56    in

Annexure 1 to GoMS 9 dated 05.01.2001. Since, the

respondents gave up their claim for exemption, the

case    of   the   appellants    was    not   gone     into    by    the

Division Bench. We are of the view that the second

appellant can look into this aspect as well.
43. The upshot of the above discussion is that the

Appeal filed against Writ Appeal No. 1873 of 2005 is

allowed.     The Appeal    filed against         the Judgment         in

Writ Appeal No. 2457 of 2005 is partly allowed. The

impugned Judgment is set aside and we restore the

Judgment of the learned Single Judge subject to the

modification that we set aside the direction to the
61
second   appellant   to   give    the   benefit   of   GoMS   103

dated 07.02.2001. The second appellant will ascertain

the value of plant and machinery on the basis of it

answering the description of the immovable property

as understood in law. The second appellant will also

go into the question, whether the first respondent

would be entitled to the benefit of the exemption of

stamp duty, etc., as claimed while taking a decision

and make available the exemption, if entitled in law.

We make it clear that the second respondent cannot be

made liable under this judgment. Parties will bear

their respective costs.
………………………………….J.
                                              [K.M. JOSEPH]




                                             ……………………………………J.
                                             [HRISHIKESH ROY]

NEW DELHI;
DATED: APRIL 26, 2023.
62