[Cites
8
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Man Singh vs Shamim Ahmad (Dead) Thr. Lrs. on 5 April, 2023
Author:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
Bench:
Sudhanshu Dhulia
,
Aniruddha Bose
1

                                                                        REPORTABLE
                                  IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                   CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION
                                       CIVIL APPEAL NO. 1874 OF 2015


          MAN SINGH                                                   … Appellant

                                                    Versus

          SHAMIM AHMAD (DEAD) THR. LRS.                              …Respondent(s)




                                                JUDGMENT
SUDHANSHU DHULIA, J.
1.    This is a tenant’s appeal, arising out of rent and

                         eviction proceedings from a Small Causes Court. The

                         landlord’s suit for eviction was allowed and the tenant’s

                         J.S.C.C. Revision and Writ Petition respectively have been

                         dismissed. Leave was granted by this Court on 11.2.2015

                         and the impugned order was stayed, subject to certain

                         conditions.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
SNEHA DAS
Date: 2023.04.05
16:25:07 IST
2.    The premises in question is a shop situated in Kotla,
Reason:
Gangoh-Town,      Nukur-Tehsil,   District-Saharanpur,   Uttar
2
Pradesh (hereinafter referred to ‘premises’) which was given

on rent to the present appellant on 06.01.1982 on a monthly

rent of Rs. 165/- per month. Later, the rent was increased to

Rs. 195/- p.m. and then from 01.01.1990 onwards to Rs.

250/- p.m. This is the admitted position. We must, however,

record here that the landlord’s claim of the rent being further

increased up to Rs.300/- per month was denied by the

tenant though the Trial Court and the Revisional Court have

given their findings on the enhanced rent, in favour of the

landlord.
3.    The appellant’s case is that he was a tenant in the

shop, on a monthly rent of Rs.250/- per month. In June,

1993, the landlord refused to accept the rent which was then

paid by the tenant through money order which was returned

with an endorsement of refusal. Under these circumstances

when the rent was being refused by the landlord, the tenant

started depositing the rent in the Court of Civil Judge (Junior

Division) (hereafter referred to as ‘Court’).   An amount of

Rs.750/- which at the rate of Rs.250/- per month was the

rent for May, June and July which was thus deposited, and

continued to be deposited in the Court, by the tenant.
3
4.    A notice was given by the landlord on 05.04.1995,

admittedly received by the tenant/appellant on 10.04.1995,

where the landlord demanded rent from May, 1993 onwards.

The notice did not result in the deposit of the rent before the

landlord and consequently the landlord filed a J.S.C.C. Suit

No.179 of 1995, in the Court of Judge, Small Causes,

Saharanpur for arrears of rent and eviction, on the grounds

of arrears of rent from 01.05.1993 onwards. In the plaint it

was alleged by the landlord that though earlier the monthly

rent of the shop was Rs.250/- per month but later through

an oral settlement in the year 1993, it was agreed between

the parties that there shall be an increase of Rs.25/- per

month every year and therefore it became Rs.275/- per

month from 01.05.1993 onwards and Rs.300/- per month

from 01.05.1994 onwards etc., and thus, the tenant-

appellant was in default of rent. Since this rent has not been

paid the tenancy stands terminated on notice already served

and hence the landlord sought an order of eviction.
5.    In his reply the appellant denied that there was any

oral agreement between the parties for yearly enhancement of

rent by Rs.25/- per month. The actual and admitted rent is
4
Rs.250/- per month, which is being duly paid in court since

May, 1993, and continuously being deposited thereafter and

the tenant has never been at any point of time a defaulter for

the payment of rent. At this juncture, it is necessary to refer

to the provision of law which is applicable in the present

case. The statute which governs the field is ‘
The Uttar

Pradesh Urban Buildings (Regulation of Letting, Rent and

Eviction) Act, 1972
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act No. 13

of 1972”).
6.    Under
Section 20
Sub-section (2) a suit for eviction of

a tenant from a building can be instituted, inter alia, on the

grounds given in sub-
section 2 (a)
of
Section 20
reads as

follows:
“(2) A suit for the eviction of a tenant
             from     a     building     after    the
             determination of his tenancy may be
             instituted on one or more of the
             following grounds, namely:
(a) that the tenant is in arrears of
             rent for not less than four months,
             and has failed to pay the same to
             the landlord within one month from
             the date of service upon him of a
             notice of demand:”

The ground of non-payment of rent by the tenant therefore

has to be for not less than ‘four months’ and which has not
5
been paid within one month of service of demand of the

notice. Moreover, even when this rent is not paid and the

landlord files his suit for eviction, the law provides yet

another opportunity to the tenant to unburden this liability,

which is by payments of the entire rent and arrears, before

the first hearing of the suit.    This is in sub-section (4) of
Section 20
which reads as under:
“20(4). In any suit for eviction on the
            ground mentioned in clause (a) of sub-
            section (2), if at the first hearing of the
            suit the tenant unconditionally pays or
            [tenders to the landlord or deposits in
            court] the entire amount of rent and
            damages for use and occupation of the
            building due from him (such damages
            for    use     and    occupation      being
            calculated at the same rate as rent)
            together with interest thereon at the
            rate of nine per cent per annum and
            the landlord’s cost of the suit in
            respect     thereof,     after   deducting
            therefrom      any     amount      already
            deposited by the tenant under sub-
            section (1) of
Section 30
, the Court
            may, in lieu of passing a decree for
            eviction on the ground, pass an order
            relieving the tenant against his liability
            for eviction on the ground:
Provided that nothing in this sub-
               section, shall apply in relation to a
               tenant or any member of the whose
               family has built or has otherwise
               acquired in a vacant state, or has
               got vacated after acquisition, any
               residential building in the same
6
city, municipality, notified area or
                 town area.
[Explanation.-     For     the
                      purposes of this sub-section-
(a) the    expression     “first
                        hearing” means the first
                        fate for any step or
                        proceeding mentioned in the
                        summons served on the
                        defendant;
(b) the expression “cost of the
                        suit” includes one-half of
                        the amount of counsel’s fee
                        taxable for a contested
                        suit.]”

As   we   have   already   referred   above   the   case   of   the

appellant/tenant has been that on refusal of the landlord to

receive the rent, he was constrained to deposit the same in

the “Court”.
The Act
No. 13 of 1972 provides under
Section

30
, an avenue for the tenant to deposit rent in court, inter

alia, in the event such rent is being refused by landlord the.
“30. Deposit of rent in Court in
            certain circumstances.-
(1) If any person claiming to be a
            tenant of a building tenders any
            amount as rent in respect of the
            building to its alleged landlord and
            the alleged landlord refuses to accept
            the same then the former may deposit
            such amount in the prescribed
            manner and continue to deposit any
7
rent which he alleges to be due for
the any subsequent period in respect
of such building until the landlord
in the meantime signifies by
notice in writing to the tenant his
willingness to accept it.
(2) Where any bona fide doubt or
dispute has arisen as to the person
who is entitled to receive any rent in
respect of any building, the tenant
may likewise deposit the rent stating
the circumstances under which such
deposit is made and may, until such
doubt has been removed or such
dispute has been settled by the
decision of any competent Court or by
settlement between the parties,
continue to deposit the rent that may
subsequently become due in respect
of such building.
(3) The deposit referred to in sub-
section(1), or sub-section (2) shall be
made in Court of the Munsif having
jurisdiction.
(4) On any deposit being made
under sub-section(1), the Court shall
cause a notice of the deposit to be
served on the alleged landlord, and
the amount of deposit may be
withdrawn by that person on
application made by him to the Court
in that behalf.
(5) On a deposit being made under
sub-section (2), the Court shall cause
notice of the deposit to be served on
the person or persons concerned and
hold the amount of the deposit for the
benefit of the person who may be
8
found entitled to it by any competent
            Court or by a settlement between the
            parties and the same shall be
            payable to such person.
(6) In respect of a deposit made as
            aforesaid, it shall be deemed that the
            person depositing it has paid it on the
            date of such deposit to the person in
            whose favour it is deposited in the
            case referred to in sub-section (1) or
            to the landlord in the case referred to
            in sub-section (2).”
                            (emphasis provided)
7.    The case of the landlord is that after the notice dated

05.04.1995 was served on the tenant (on 10.05.1995), and

he refused to pay the rent within the stipulated period of one

month, his tenancy stood terminated and he had therefore

filed a suit for eviction before the Judge, Small Causes Court,

Saharanpur for his the eviction. The position of the tenant

throughout has been that there was no occasion for him to

deposit the rent on receiving the notice dated 10.05.1995, or

on the first hearing under
Section 20(4)
of the Act, for the

simple reason that he had never defaulted in payment of rent

as the entire rent at the rate of Rs. 250/- per month was

being deposited by him in the Court under
Section 30
of the

Act. The Judge, Small Cause Court gave a finding that the
9
tenant was in arrears of rent, holding that the rent was

Rs.300/- per month and not Rs.250/- per month which

admittedly   has   never   been   deposited   anywhere,   and

consequently a decree of eviction and recovery of rent was

passed against the tenant. The tenant then filed JSCC

Revision before the District Judge, Saharanpur which was

dismissed on 31.07.2003 and so was his writ petition, later

by the Allahabad High Court on 17.02.2012.
8.    The Allahabad High Court though, has set aside the

findings of the Trial Court and the Sessions Court, on the

enhanced rent.     The High Court held that there was no

evidence before the trial Court of any ‘oral agreement’ set up

by the landlord, which provided for a periodical increase of

rent from Rs. 250/- per month to Rs. 275/- per month, and

then to Rs.300/- per month, and so on. Since the so-called

oral agreement between the parties was not proved, it would

be deemed that the correct rent between the parties was Rs.

250/- per month, which was being paid by the tenant in the

Court under
Section 30
of the Act.
9.    The High Court then proceeded to decide the legal

position post notice dated 05.04.1995.
Section 30
of the Act
10
provides that the deposit may be made in the Court on

refusal of the rent by the landlord, but this position only

lasts till the landlord expresses his willingness to receive the

rent. This willingness to receive the rent has to be seen in his

notice dated 05.04.1995 received on 10.05.1995, by the

tenant. The High Court dealt with this aspect and held that

once the notice of demand was sent to the tenant by the

landlord on 05.04.1995 (received by the appellant on

10.04.1995), demanding a rent at the enhanced rate, then

the tenant had no option but to deposit the rent before the

landlord, as against depositing it in the Court. He could

though deposit the admitted rent (i.e. Rs.250/-) and not the

enhanced rent (Rs.300/-), but the deposit had to be made to

the landlord.
10.   This was not done and the defence of the tenant that

he continued to deposit the “admitted rent” in the Court will

not come to his rescue as once the landlord had expressed

his willingness to accept the rent, which was expressed in his

notice of demand dated 05.04.1951 then such a rent was

liable to be given to the landlord and not in the Court. We

are of the considered view that the reasoning given by the
11
learned Single Judge of Allahabad High Court, which follows

a Full Court judgment of the High Court, correctly lays down

the law.
Section 30
gives an opportunity to the defendant to

deposit the admitted rent in Court, but this arrangement

lasts only till the landlord expresses his willingness to receive

the rent directly.
11.   Let us again examine sub-section (1) of
Section 30
under which the tenant can deposit rent in the Court. The

above provisions have already been referred above, but we

would like to emphasize the last few lines of the provision

which says:
‘…until the landlord in the
              meantime signifies by notice in
              writing to the tenant his
              willingness to accept it’


In other words, the tenant can only deposit rent in the Court,

as long as the landlord has refused to accept the rent. Once

the landlord expresses his willingness to accept the rent,

which in the present case he does by serving the notice dated

05.04.1995 (received on 10.04.1995), the tenant has no

option but to deposit the rent to the landlord. This has not

been done by the appellant.
12
12.     The Full Bench decision of which reference has been

       given by the Allahabad High Court in its impugned

       judgement dated 17.02.2012 is Gokaran Singh v. Ist

       Additional District and Sessions Judge, Hardoi and

       Ors.1 There were three questions before the Full Bench, all

       of them were relating to the Act No.13 of 1972. One of the

       questions with which we are presently concerned was:
“In a case where the landlord had
                     earlier been refusing to accept rent at
                     the correct rate and had been claiming
                     rent at higher rate and the tenant had
                     as a consequence of landlords earlier
                     refusal in the past, deposited the rent
                     in Court under
Section 30
and
                     thereafter, landlord serves a formal
                     notice of demand again at a higher
                     rate, whether the tenant without
                     tendering rent at the correct rate to the
                     landlord has a right straight away to
                     deposit the same under
Section 30
                     (1)
.”

       After discussing the entire law on the subject, the conclusion

       derived by the Full Bench to this question is as follows:
37. (2) If the landlord has been
                     refusing to accept the rent at the
                     correct rate and has been claiming
                     rent at higher rate, the tenant as a
                     consequence of landlord’s earlier
                     refusal in the past, deposited the rent
                     in the Court under
Section 30
and if
1
2000 SCC OnLine All 174
13
thereafter landlord serves formal
                        notice to of demand against the higher
                        rate and expresses his willingness to
                        accept the rent, the tenant after receipt
                        of notice is under an obligation to
                        tender the rent at least at the rate
                        admitted to him to the landlord and
                        has got no right to straight away
                        deposit the same under
Section 30(1)
of the Act.”
13.     The learned counsel for the appellant Sh. U.K. Uniyal,

       would rely on a later decision of this Court which is
Ajai

       Agarwal and Ors. v. Har Govind Prasad Singhal and

       Ors.2
. We are afraid that the facts of the said case were

       entirely different.      In the case cited above, the tenant was

       given the benefit of sub-section (4) of
Section 20
of the Act, as

       he had deposited the “admitted rent” before the first date of

       hearing. The question before the Court was whether in order

       to get the benefit of sub-section (4) of
Section 20
the tenant

       was liable to deposit the enhanced rate of rent as claimed by

       the landlord, or will he be relieved of the liability if he

       deposits the admitted rent. This court was of the opinion,

       which was in fact the settled position of law, that in case a

       tenant deposits the admitted rent, under sub-
section 4
of
2
(2005) 13 SCC 145
14
Section 20
, he would get the benefit.    Paragraph 19 of the

above cited judgement clears this position.
19. In the absence of any proper
           evidence regarding the purported
           agreement for periodical enhancement
           of the rents, it becomes difficult to
           accept the story of such agreed
           enhancement as made out on behalf of
           the landlord or its application to the
           provisions of
Section 20(4)
of the Act.
           Since there is no such evidence on
           record, except for the uncorroborated
           statement of the landlord, we have no
           other option but to accept the story of
           the appellant tenants that the parties
           had agreed to the increase of the
           monthly rent up to a maximum of Rs
           100 per month and that too after the
           renovation had been effected to the
           shop room and a shutter had been
           fixed therein. If such be the case, the
           appellants would also be entitled to
           the protection of
Section 20(4)
, since
           the rents admitted to be in arrears at
           the rate of Rs 100 per month had been
           duly deposited by the tenant within
           the time prescribed under such
           provision of the Act.
14.   The learned counsel of the appellant Shri Uniyal,

sought to draw a parallel with the said case and would argue

that in the present case as well the tenant has been

depositing the admitted rent. However, as we have already

noticed the facts of the two cases are entirely different. The

above case therefore has no application to the present case.
15
15.   We therefore find no merit in the appeal which is

hereby dismissed. All interim Orders shall stand vacated.
..……….………………….J.
                                    [ANIRUDDHA BOSE]



                                   ...………………………….J.
                                   [SUDHANSHU DHULIA]
New Delhi.
April 05, 2023.