[Cites
8
, Cited by
3
]
Supreme Court of India
Ghanshyam Upadhyay vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh on 19 August, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 688
Bench:
V. Ramasubramanian
,
A. S. Bopanna
,
S. A. Bobde
1


                                                                                   REPORTABLE

                                    IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                    CRIMINAL ORIGINAL JURISDICTION

                                      CRL. M.P. No.70798/2020
                                                 IN
                              WRIT PETITION (CRIMINAL) NO. 177 OF 2020


                         Ghanshyam Upadhyay                                  .… Petitioner(s)

                                                       Versus

                         State of U.P. & Ors.                                …. Respondent(s)


                                                       ORDER
1.   The    petitioner    in    this     Criminal     Miscellaneous

                         Petition/application     is    the     petitioner    in   W.P   (Crl.)

                         No.177/2020. The said writ petition was filed under
Article

                         32
of the Constitution of India, in the nature of public

                         interest seeking for issue of Writ of Mandamus and direct

                         the respondent Nos.1 to 3 in the writ petition to initiate

                         action with regard to the destruction of residential building

                         and other properties of accused –Vikas Dubey and to
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
Sanjay Kumar
Date: 2020.08.19
15:50:38 IST
safeguard the life of the accused. Before the petition was
Reason:
taken up for consideration certain other developments had
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
2
occurred, inasmuch as the said Vikas Dubey was killed by

  the police in an alleged encounter. Along with the said writ

  petition, certain other writ petitions which were also filed in

  public interest seeking for an appropriate enquiry in that

  regard were tagged. All the related writ petitions were taken

  up for consideration together. The State Government in a

  reply filed to the said writ petitions, apart from referring to

  the other aspects of the matter had also indicated that the

  Government having taken serious cognizance of all the

  events, apart from constituting a Special Investigation Team

  had also constituted a Commission of Inquiry under the

  Commission of Inquiries Act, 1951 headed by a former

  Judge of Allahabad High Court. In that regard it is to be

  noted that Shri Justice Shashikant Agrawal, a former Judge

  had been appointed.
2.    In the course of the proceedings before this Court,

  based on a suggestion made by this Court, the State

  Government had undertaken the exercise to expand the

  composition of the Commission. Accordingly, in addition to

  the former High Court Judge who had been appointed the

  State Government suggested the name of Dr. Justice B.S.
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
3
Chauhan, a former Judge of this Court to be the Chairman

  and Mr. K.L. Gupta, IPS, Former Director General of Police

  to be a Member.             This Court having considered it

  appropriate had through the order dated 22.07.2020

  accepted the constitution of the Commission of Inquiry in

  the said manner and the writ petition was directed to be

  listed along with the report of the Commission.                 The

  petitioners were also granted the liberty of applying to the

  Inquiry Commission to be heard in the matter.
3.    When     this   is   the   position   the   instant   criminal

  miscellaneous petition is filed by the petitioner seeking that

  the Judicial Commission constituted by the State be

  scrapped and a SIT as sought by the petitioner be

  constituted by this Court to carry out investigation on all

  issues raised by the petitioner. The said prayer is made by

  the petitioner alleging conflict of interest and likely bias on

  the part of the Chairman, Dr. Justice B.S. Chauhan and

  Shri K.L. Gupta, the Member. The petitioner in that regard

  has relied upon an Article published in “The Wire” dated

  29.07.2020.
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
4
4.    We have heard the petitioner­in­person and perused

  the petition papers.
5.    At the outset it is necessary to notice that the

  petitioner   herein    had    filed    the   applications   in   I.A.

  No.68207/2020         and    I.A.     No.67940/2020     after    the

  constitution of the Inquiry Commission raising certain

  objections with regard to Shri K.L. Gupta being the Member

  of the Commission since according to the petitioner he had

  made certain comments in favour of the police in the

  interview given to the media. This Court having considered

  the same and on not finding it objectionable, dismissed the

  application through the order dated 28.07.2020 holding the

  application to be devoid of merits.          Despite the same, the

  very same contentions are urged in the instant application

  as well and has also raised an additional contention that the

  said Shri K.L. Gupta is related to Shri Mohit Agarwal, the IG

  of Kanpur Zone.         Further, objection is raised to the

  continuation of Dr. Justice B.S. Chauhan as the Chairman

  of the Commission since the news report relied on by the

  petitioner states that his brother and relative are legislators
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
5
from the Bhartiya Janata Party which runs the Government

  in Uttar Pradesh.
6.    As noted, the entire basis for making the allegations as

  contained in the miscellaneous petition is an Article relied

  on by the petitioner said to have been published in the

  newspaper. There is no other material on record to confirm

  the truth or otherwise of the statement made in the

  newspaper.      In our view this Court will have to be very

  circumspect while accepting such contentions based only on

  certain newspaper reports.       This Court in a series of

  decisions has repeatedly held that the newspaper item

  without any further proof is of no evidentiary value.      The

  said principle laid down has thereafter been taken note in

  several public interest litigations to reject the allegations

  contained in the petition supported by newspaper report. It

  would be appropriate to notice the decision in the case of
Kushum Lata vs. Union of India & Ors.
(2006) 6 SCC 180

  wherein it is observed thus, “…. It is also noticed that the

  petitions are based on newspaper reports without any

  attempt to verify their authenticity. As observed by this Court
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
6
in several cases, newspaper reports do not constitute

  evidence.    A petition based on unconfirmed news reports,

  without verifying their authenticity should not normally be

  entertained. As noted above, such petitions do not provide

  any basis for verifying the correctness of statements made

  and information given in the petition.”
7.    This Court in the case of Rohit Pandey vs. Union of

  India (2005) 13 SCC 702 while considering the petition

  purporting to be in public interest filed by a Member of the

  Legal Fraternity had come down heavily on the petitioner

  since the said petition was based only on two newspaper

  reports without further verification.
8.    In the above backdrop, in the instant case it is to be

  noticed     that     the   Chairman   and   a   Member   of   the

  Commission had held high Constitutional positions and

  while making allegations the petitioner has based his claim

  only on the newspaper report and the manner in which the

  averments are made in the application is unacceptable.
9.    In any case, the allegation that the brother of the

  chairman of the Commission is a legislator belonging to or
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
7
supporting the party in power and that the member of the

  Commission is related to the IG of Police (Kanpur Range) are

  not sufficient to come to the conclusion that it would lead to

  bias or conflict of interest since there is no indication

  whatsoever as to the nature of influence such of those

  relatives would be able to exert and as to whether they are

  in a dominant position.
10.   It must be remembered that we are dealing here with

  an Inquiry Commission constituted under the
Commissions

  of Inquiry Act
, whose functions and role are by now well

  defined. As held by the Constitution Bench in
Ram

  Krishna Dalmia vs. Justice S. R. Tendolkar
, 1959 SCR

  279, a commission constituted under the
Commissions of

  Inquiry Act, 1952
is empowered merely to investigate, record

  its   findings   and   make   its   recommendations.    These

  recommendations are not enforceable proprio vigore.
The

  view taken in Ram Krishna Dalmia, was reinforced by a

  larger bench in
State of Karnataka vs. Union of India
,

  (1977) 4 SCC 608.
In fact, this Court went in
Sham Kant

  vs. State of Maharashtra
, 1992 Suppl. (2) SCC 521, to the
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
8
extent     of   holding   that   the   findings   of   the   Inquiry

  Commission are not binding on the Court, while dealing

  with an appeal arising out of conviction and sentence of a

  police officer. The police officer who was the appellant before

  this Court in the said case sought to rely upon the findings

  of the Inquiry Commission that the victim of custodial

  violence could have sustained injuries prior to his arrest.

  But this Court refused to rely upon the findings of the

  Inquiry Commission to overturn the conviction of the police

  officer.
11.
In
K. Vijaya Bhaskar Reddy vs. Government of

  Andhra Pradesh
, AIR 1996 AP 62, a Division Bench of the

  Andhra Pradesh High Court had an occasion to deal with

  the challenge to the appointment of a one­man Commission

  of Inquiry under the
Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952
. One

  of the grounds of challenge was bias on the part of the

  appointee. After pointing out that bias by interest which

  disqualifies a Judge, may fall into two broad classes namely,
(i) bias arising out of pecuniary interest, and (ii) bias arising

  out of personal interest in the outcome, on account of the
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
9
Judge’s relationship with one of the parties, the Division

  Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court quoted Massey

  from his Treatise on Administrative Law to the following

  effect: “personal bias arises from a certain relationship

  equation between the deciding authority and the parties

  which incline him unfavourably or otherwise on the side of

  one of the parties before him”.
12.   Though a contention was raised in K. Vijaya Bhaskar

  Reddy that the principle has no application to the

  proceedings before an Inquiry Commission, which are

  basically inquisitorial and not judicial or quasi­judicial or

  adversarial, the Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High

  Court held that the duty to act fairly and impartially flowed

  out of the principles of natural justice. Therefore, the

  Andhra Pradesh High Court upheld the right of the

  petitioner therein to raise the plea of bias. However, the

  Court    held    that     to      sustain   a     plea   of    reasonable

  apprehension         of   bias,     (i)   there    must       be   cogent,

  uncontroverted and undisputed material, and (ii) the court

  cannot go by vague, whimsical and capricious suspicion.
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
10
Applying these principles, the Andhra Pradesh High Court

  rejected the challenge made by a former Chief Minister of

  the state, to the appointment of a retired Judge as one­man

  Commission to inquire into certain alleged irregularities

  committed by him while in office.
13.   Thus, even in a case where the petitioner before the

  Court was a person against whom the Commission of

  Inquiry was constituted, the Court applied strict standards,

  for testing the allegation of personal bias against the Inquiry

  Commission.
14.   In the case on hand, the Petitioner is a lawyer by

  profession who practices in Mumbai and has come up by

  way of Public Interest Litigation. Therefore, the allegations of

  bias made by him against the members of the Commission

  merely on the basis of newspaper reports and nothing more,

  are liable to be rejected outright.
15.   The petitioner has relied on the decision of this Court

  in the case of
Ranjit Thakur vs. Union of India & Ors.
(1987) 4 SCC 611 to contend that this Court held that the

  Likelihood of bias in the mind of the party would be
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
11
sufficient to complain. The facts in the said case led to such

  conclusion inasmuch as the nature of involvement of

  respondent No.4 in punishing the appellant
in that case
and

  thereafter participating lead to bias and that position was

  accepted. The facts involved herein are entirely different.

  The proceedings herein are not an inter se determination of

  legal issues between the parties but a fact­finding exercise.

  The petitioner herein is an advocate who practices law in

  Mumbai, Maharashtra and is in no way connected to the

  incident in question which took place in U.P. However, the

  petition filed by him in public interest was accepted and the

  Commission of Inquiry consisting of persons who had held

  high position has been constituted. The enquiry held would

  be in public domain and the petitioner has already been

  granted the liberty of participating therein.   The report of

  the enquiry is ordered to be filed in the petitions which were

  filed before this Court. Therefore, there would be sufficient

  safeguard to the manner in which the inquiry would be

  held.     We find that the petitioner has been raising

  unnecessary apprehensions and repeated applications are

  being filed which in fact is hampering the process of inquiry.
WP (Crl) No.177/2020
12
16.   For all the aforestated reasons we are of the opinion

    that the instant petition/application is without any merit

    and the same is accordingly dismissed.
..…………....................CJI.
(S. A. Bobde)


                                  …..…………....................J.
                                  (A. S. Bopanna)


                                  ..…..………......................J
                                  (V. Ramasubramanian)
AUGUST 19, 2020
NEW DELHI
WP (Crl) No.177/2020