[Cites
96
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
Chairman, Board Of Trustees, C.P.T. vs M/S Arebee Star Maritime Agen.Pvt.L on 5 August, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 671
Author:
R.F. Nariman
Bench:
Indira Banerjee
,
Navin Sinha
,
R. F. Nariman
REPORTABLE

                                            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                                            CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION

                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2525 OF 2018



                           THE CHAIRMAN, BOARD OF TRUSTEES,
                           COCHIN PORT TRUST                              …APPELLANT

                                                         VERSUS

                           M/S AREBEE STAR MARITIME AGENCIES
                           PVT. LTD. & ORS.                               …RESPONDENTS

                                                        WITH
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2526 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2527 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2528 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2529 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2530 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2531 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2532 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2533 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2534 OF 2018
                                             CIVIL APPEAL NO. 2535 OF 2018

                                                     JUDGMENT
R.F. Nariman, J.
1. This batch of appeals arises out of a reference order made by a
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
INDU MARWAH
Division Bench of this Court dated 07.03.2018 reported as (2018) 4
Date: 2020.08.05
18:46:39 IST
Reason:
1
SCC 592. The learned Division Bench stated as to how these

proceedings arose before it as follows:
“1. These proceedings have arisen from a judgment dated
     27-9-2011 [Arebee Star Maritime Agencies (P)
     Ltd. v. Cochin Port Trust, Original Petition No. 21041 of
     1999, decided on 27-9-2011 (Ker)] of a Division Bench of the
     Kerala High Court in a batch of writ appeals and original
     petitions, preferred by various shipping agents.
2. The question before the High Court was whether the
     liability to pay “ground rent” on containers unloaded at
     Cochin Port, but not cleared by the consignees/importers
     and refused to be destuffed by the Port, on the ground of
     inadequate storage space, can be imposed on the owners
     of the vessel/steamer agents beyond the period of 75 days,
     fixed by the Tariff Authority of Major Ports [TAMP], a
     statutory body constituted under
Section 47-A
of the Major
     Port Trusts Act [MPT Act], 1963.
3. The facts of the case are summarised in the following
     extract of the judgment of the High Court:
“The sequence of events that led to the stalemate refers to
     the incidents which happened in 1998 when there (sic)
     imports synthetic woollen rags (in containers) in the Cochin
     Port Trust premises. The said containers were destuffed to
     facilitate Customs examination and to return the empty
     containers to the steamer agents. The destuffed cargo
     occupied much larger space and was not promptly cleared
     by the consignees in view of the hurdles placed by the
     Customs stating that the cargo actually did not constitute old
     woollen rags as declared, but mostly were brand new
     clothes which could not have been cleared. The “modus
     operandi” of the consignees/importers attracted wide
     attention of all concerned and taking note of the probable
     extent of liability to be imposed by the Customs Department,
     and the liability to be satisfied to the Port and others
     concerned, the consignees did not turn up to clear the goods
     and they were lying idle in the Port premises for quite long.”
2
The Port Trust charged “ground rent” from the steamer
        agents/owners of the containers.”
2. After then setting out the relevant provisions of the
Major Port Trusts

  Act, 1963
[“MPT Act”] and the relevant portions of five decisions of this

  Court, namely,
Port of Madras v. K.P.V. Sheik Mohamed Rowther

  & Co.
1963 Supp.
(2) SCR 915 [“Rowther-I”]; Port of Madras v.
K.P.V. Sheik Mohd. Rowther & Co. P. Ltd. (1997) 10 SCC 285

  [“Rowther-II”];
Port of Bombay v. Sriyanesh Knitters
(1999) 7 SCC

  228;
Forbes Forbes Campbell & Co. v. Port of Bombay
(2015) 1

  SCC 228 [“Forbes-II”] and
Rasiklal Kantilal & Co. v. Port of Bombay
(2017) 11 SCC 1, the Division Bench then stated:
“23. Analysing the above judgments, the following position
        emerges:
23.1. The decisions in Rowther-I, Rowther-II, Sriyanesh
        Knitters, Forbes-II and Rasiklal do not seem to follow a
        consistent line about whom the Port Trust has to fasten the
        liability for payment of its charges;
23.2. The Constitution Bench judgment in Rowther-I holds
        that when Port Trust takes charge of the goods from the
        shipowner, the shipowner is the bailor and the Port Trust is
        the bailee. While the Bench of two Judges in Sriyanesh
        Knitters holds that there comes into existence the
        relationship of bailor and bailee between the consignee and
        the Port Trust, the decision in Forbes-II disagrees with this
        view of Sriyanesh Knitters. Rasiklal opines that enquiry into
        such relationship is irrelevant in determining the right of a
        Port Trust to recover its dues;
23.3. While the decision in Sriyanesh Knitters was based on
        the interpretation of the term “owner” under Section 2(o) of
        the MPT Act, the judgments in Forbes-II and Rasiklal do not
3
find the question of interpretation of the term “owner” to be
relevant;
23.4. While Forbes-II relies upon the Constitution Bench
decision         in Rowther-I to       come         to      its
conclusions, Rasiklal does not find Rowther-I to be an
authority for the proposition that until the title in goods is
passed to the consignee, the liability to pay various charges
payable to a Port Trust, for its services in respect of goods,
falls exclusively on the steamer agent;
23.5. In Rowther-II, it was held that once the goods are
handed over to the Port Trust by the steamer and the
steamer agents have duly endorsed the bill of lading or
issued the delivery order, their obligation to deliver the
goods personally to the owner or the endorsee comes to an
end. The decision in Rasiklal, which has been delivered after
the reference of Forbes-I was disposed of, takes a contrary
view that in cases where the consignee does not come to
take delivery of goods, the position of law
laid down
by
Rowther-II would result in a situation that the Port Trust
would incur expenses without any legal right to recover such
amount from the consignor, with whom there was no
contractual obligation; and

23.6. The Bench of two Judges in Rasiklal opined that it
agrees with the conclusions recorded in Rowther-
II and Forbes-II that a Port Trust could recover the rates
due, either from the steamer agent or the consignee.
However, the holding in Rowther-II finds only the consignee
to be liable.
24. Taking note of the above inconsistencies in the
judgments which have been delivered after the
pronouncement by the Constitution Bench in Rowther-I, we
are inclined to the view that the following issues need to be
resolved by a larger Bench:
24.1. Whether in the interpretation of the provision of
Section 2(o) of the MPT Act, the question of title of goods,
and the point of time at which title passes to the consignee
is relevant to determine the liability of the consignee or
4
steamer agent in respect of charges to be paid to the Port
        Trust;
24.2. Whether a consignor or a steamer agent is absolved
        of the responsibility to pay charges due to a Port Trust, for
        its services in respect of goods which are not cleared by the
        consignee, once the bill of lading is endorsed or the delivery
        order is issued;
24.3. Whether a steamer agent can be made liable for
        payment of storage charges/demurrage, etc. in respect of
        goods which are not cleared by the consignee, where the
        steamer agent has not issued a delivery order; if so, to what
        extent;
24.4. What are the principles which determine whether a
        Port Trust is entitled to recover its dues, from the steamer
        agent or the consignee; and

        24.5. While the Port Trust does have certain statutory
        obligations with regard to the goods entrusted to it, whether
        there is any obligation, either statutory or contractual, that
        obliges the Port Trust to destuff every container that is
        entrusted to it and return the empty containers to the
        shipping agent.
25. The larger Bench may deal with any additional issues
        relevant to the context, as it deems necessary.”
3. The impugned judgment dated 27.09.2011 of a Division Bench of the

  Kerala High Court decided a limited question that was argued before

  it, namely:
“Whether liability to pay ‘Ground Rent’ in respect of the
        containers unloaded in the Cochin Port, lying uncleared by
        the Consignees/Importers and refused to be destuffed by
        the port, for inadequate storage space, can be mulcted on
        the owners of the Vessel/Steamer Agents beyond 75 days,
        in view of the Scheme of the Statute (Major Port Trusts Act
        1963 – in short ‘MPT Act’) and the contents of the TAMP
5
(Tariff Authority for Major Ports) Orders dated 10.11.1999,
       19.07.2000, and 13.09.2005, is the point.”
4. The impugned judgment came to be passed as a number of writ

  appeals had been preferred by shipping agents, the Port Trust, and

  one consignee against the judgment dated 16.09.2002 of a single

  Judge of the Kerala High Court. A writ petition, namely, W.P. (C) No.

  32191 of 2004, was also disposed of by the impugned judgment, as it

  raised a similar question of law. The facts involved in these appeals

  and writ petition were briefly stated in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the

  impugned High Court judgment as follows:
“4. Goods involved in all the cases, imported as ‘FCL’ (Full
       Container Loads) mainly consist of ‘synthetic woollen rags’,
       except in W.P. (C) No. 32191 of 2004, where it is VCD
       players. The period of import is during August 1998 to March
       1999. All the Containers now stand returned after destuffing,
       pursuant to common judgment in the Original Petitions and
       the interim orders passed in the Appeals.
5. Some of the goods imported earlier in the Cochin Port,
       titled as “woollen rags” were actually found to be “brand new
       clothes” on inspection by the Customs Department, which
       attracted heavy duty, penalty and such other charges. The
       dispute between the Consignees and the Customs went on

       for an indefinite period and in the said circumstances, the
       consignees did not turn up to clear the goods in respect of
       the subsequent transactions as well, presumably knowing
       the probable outcome and the huge liability to be satisfied
       under different heads including the Port charges and other
       dues because of the delay. So also, no action was taken by
       the Port Trust to destuff the goods and they retained the
       containers for their own reasons.”
6
5. The learned Senior Advocate who led the arguments on behalf of the

  shipping agents before the High Court made one important

  concession, namely, that the shipping agents do not propose to press

  the contention as to their liability in satisfying ground rent, except that

  they ought not to be mulcted with any such liability beyond the period

  of 75 days, which was set out in the relevant Tariff Authority for Major

  Ports (“TAMP”) Orders. At the point of time that the Division Bench

  delivered its judgment, a Division Bench of this Hon’ble Court in
Forbes Forbes Campbell & Co. Ltd. v Board of Trustees, Port of

  Bombay
(2008) 4 SCC 87 [“Forbes-I”], had referred the following

  three questions to a larger Bench:
“9. The questions of law of public importance in this appeal
        are as follows:
1. Whether a steamer agent can be construed as owner of
        the goods carried in his principal's vessel within the definition
        of “owner” in relation to goods under
Section 2(o)
of the
        Major Port Trusts Act, 1963?
2. Whether a steamer agent at all can be made liable for
        payment of storage charges/demurrage, which are
        uncleared by the consignee, even where steamer agent has
        not issued delivery order?
3. In the event a steamer agent is held liable, to what extent
        he is liable and whether it absolves the respondent from
        acting promptly under
Sections 61
or 62 of the Act?
6. Since this reference had not yet been answered by the larger Bench

  at the time the impugned proceedings were ongoing, the learned
7
Senior Advocate representing the shipping agents before the High

  Court clarified that the High Court may go on to decide only the

  question as to the extent of liability of the shipping agents, i.e. whether

  liability could extend beyond the 75 days mentioned in the relevant

  TAMP Orders.
7. In answering the question raised before it, the impugned judgment

  referred to the fact that the shipping agents repeatedly requested the

  Port Trust to destuff the containers which were lying at the port, but

  that the Port Trust stated that they cannot do so for inadequacy of

  space. The impugned judgment therefore held that because of the

  lapse on the part of the consignee on the one hand in not lifting the

  goods, and the Port Trust on the other in not destuffing containers, the

  shipping agents were caught in between, and were being made “to pay

  through their nose”. This being the case, the impugned judgment went

  on to construe sections 61 and 62 of the MPT Act, by which a Board

  “may”, after the expiry of two months from the time when any goods

  passed into its custody, sell such goods under certain circumstances.
The impugned judgment went on to hold that the expression “may” in

  the said provisions must be read as “shall”, as a duty is cast on the

  Port Trust to get rid of the goods as soon as possible in a fact situation
8
where the consignee does not lift such goods. Ultimately, the

  impugned judgment concluded:
“44. In the above facts and circumstances, this Court finds
        that, there is no rationale on the part of the Port Trust in
        contending that they are entitled to collect ‘Ground Rent’
        charges in respect of containers indefinitely. The course
        pursued by them without causing the goods to be destuffed,
        despite the specific request, on the failure of the
        Consignee/Importer to have it cleared and by proceeding
        against such goods for causing the same to be sold in the
        public auction, realising the funds, to be apportioned in the
        manner specified under
Section 63
, cannot but be
        deprecated. This Court holds that the respondent Port Trust
        can demand ‘Ground Rent’ only to a maximum period of ‘75
        days’ as specified by the Tariff Authority for Major Ports as
        per the relevant TAMP Orders discussed above.”
8. Shri Ritin Rai, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the

  Appellant Port Trust, referred to various provisions of the
Customs Act,

  1962
and the MPT Act, and argued that once responsibility for the

  goods is taken over by the Port Trust, the Port Trust becomes a bailee

  of the goods delivered to it by the ship-owner, who in turn is relieved

  of its liability for loss or damage to the goods during the period when

  the goods are in the custody of the Port Trust. Thus, the Port Trust is

  entitled to recover, from the shipping agents, demurrage and other

  dues for the period until a delivery order is issued by the shipping agent

  to the consignee, and for this purpose is entitled to exercise a lien over

  the goods for realisation of such demurrage. He added that where a

  delivery order is withheld or withdrawn, disabling the consignee from
9
getting delivery of the goods, the position remains as if no delivery

order was issued at all. In such a case, the liability for payment of

demurrage and other dues of the Port Trust will continue to be with the

shipping agent. According to the learned Senior Advocate, the different

strands of the judgments of this Court can all be reconciled to reach

the conclusion canvassed for by the learned Senior Advocate. He

argued that the submission that upon landing and discharge of the

goods from the vessel, the Port Trust becomes a sub-bailee of the

shippers/consignors, and that the Port Trust can therefore recover its

dues only from the consignors, or the consignee who steps into the

consignor’s shoes upon endorsement of the bill of lading pursuant to
section 1
of the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856, is wholly incorrect. He

dealt with the decision of the Privy Council in “The K.H. Enterprise”

[1994] 1 Lloyd’s Law Reports 593, and distinguished
the said decision
from the present case, stating that the decision nowhere relates to the

obligations of the bailee to the sub-bailee for services undertaken by it

at the bailee’s request. He went on to argue that in any case, the sub-
bailee in
K.H. Enterprise
(supra) was entitled to payment for its

services from the bailee pursuant to the agreement between them, and

not from the bailor/shipper. Analogously, therefore, the Port Trust (sub-

bailee) would be entitled to payment for its services from the shipping
10
agent (bailee). He was at pains to argue that the passing of title to the

  goods is immaterial when it comes to the Port Trust collecting its dues,

  as the Port Trust has no means of ascertaining when such title has

  passed. In any event, Shri Rai contended that the correct reading of

  the MPT Act leads to the conclusion that the passing of title is in any

  case wholly irrelevant. He stressed the fact that containers belonging

  to the shipping agents are required to be returned to them upon

  destuffing, as a result of which they are liable for ground rent.
He

  strongly supported the decision in
Rasiklal
(supra) which laid this

  proposition down as a matter of law. He also strongly deprecated the

  impugned judgment of the Kerala High Court, stating that the discretion

  that has been given under sections 61 and 62 of the MPT Act to the

  Port Trust cannot be converted into a mandatory obligation, and that

  “may” must be read as “may”, and not “shall”.
9. Shri Prashant S. Pratap, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

  of Respondent No.1, a shipping/steamer agent, was at pains to point

  out that endorsement on the bill of lading by the shipping agent, and a

  delivery order being given by the shipping agent, does not pass title to

  the goods. The endorsement on the bill of lading by the consignor in

  favour of a notified party or a consignee, when read with
section 1
of

  the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856, is the endorsement that passes
11
title to goods, and must not be confused with his client’s endorsement

on the bill of lading. He relied heavily on the Privy Council judgment in
K.H. Enterprise
(supra), stating that the decision applied on all fours

to the present case, and that therefore the Port Trust as a sub-bailee

of the goods steps into the shoes of the bailee, i.e. the ship-owner/ship-

owner’s agent, and must therefore sue the bailor i.e. the

consignor/shipper, and not the original bailee. This was also because

implied consent has been given by the consignor to handover the

goods to the Port Trust at the port of despatch for delivery to the

consignee, the Port Trust being fully aware that the goods are not the

property of the carrier, namely the vessel, who is the bailee. He argued

that on a conjoint reading of the provisions of the MPT Act, and on a

reading of
section 158
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872, the bailor must

repay to the bailee “necessary expenses” incurred by it for the

purposes of the bailment. This would, therefore, enable the Port Trust

to recover storage charges from the bailor who is always the owner of

the goods, whether consignor or consignee, but never from the ship-

owner, who is never the bailor. Shri Pratap argued that the MPT Act

itself makes a clear distinction between the steamer agent, who is the

agent of the vessel, and other agents, namely those of the

consignor/consignee, under section 62 of the MPT Act. Further, upon
12
sale of goods under
section 63
, the excess must be returned only to

the owner. Such excess can never be paid to the ship-owner or the

steamer’s agent. He further went on to argue that a clear distinction is

made in section 2(o) of the MPT Act between “owner” in relation to the

goods, and “owner” in relation to the vessel, and that the steamer

agent – who is the agent of the vessel – can never be said to be the

“owner” of goods.
He relied strongly on the judgment in
Sriyanesh

Knitters
(supra), stating that the Port Trust is a bailee on behalf of the

consignee who is the bailor, on a consideration of
section 1
of the

Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856, and submitted that
Forbes-II
(supra)

is wholly incorrect and deserves to be overruled.
He dealt with the

judgment in
Rowther-I
(supra) in great detail, and distinguished it from

the present case, stating that the judgment does not concern

demurrage or storage charges post landing of the goods, and after the

Port Trust takes custody of the goods and issues the receipt, and is

thus not applicable to the facts of the present case.
Further, according

to him,
Rasiklal
(supra), insofar as it agrees with
Forbes-II
(supra) is

incorrect.
Insofar as
Rasiklal
(supra) notes the legal position that the

Port Trust is a sub-bailee of the goods bailed by the consignor (bailor)

to the ship-owner (bailee), it is absolutely correct and must be followed.
So far as
Rowther-II
(supra) is concerned, the learned Senior
13
Advocate stated that the portion of
Rowther-II
(supra), which mixes up

endorsement by the steamer agent with the endorsement by the

consignor, cannot be said to be good law. He also contended that the

issuance of a delivery order to the consignee is irrelevant, and has no

bearing on the liability to pay storage charges. He further argued that

to the extent that the judgment states that the vessel and its agent

cannot be mulcted with the charges, the judgment is absolutely correct

and must be followed. Insofar as goods carried by containers is

concerned, Shri Pratap contends that the Port Trust itself states that

the charges claimed by the Port Trust are in respect of goods, and not

in respect of the container in which the goods are stuffed. Thus, the

container cannot be said to be “goods” as defined which would incur

storage charges. He also relied upon the counter affidavit filed by the

Port Trust before the High Court, in which the Port Trust admitted that

if the goods were imported as bulk cargo, the liability to satisfy

demurrage would not be on the steamer agent but on the consignee.

The mere fact that they are carried in a container can therefore make

no difference. He argued that since all questions were now open before

this Court, he was not constrained by the predecessor counsel

(including himself) in the High Court, stating that as a reference was

then pending to a larger Bench of this Court, they did not argue the
14
larger question as to whether the steamer agent is at all liable. There

   is no estoppel in any case in law, and the correct position has to be

   determined by this Court.
10. Shri Rahul Narichania, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf

   of Respondent No.6 (The Container Shipping Lines Association), who

   is an Intervenor in these proceedings, argued that the definition of

   “owner” in section 2(o) of the MPT Act differentiates between owner of

   the “vessel”, and owner of the “goods”, and that a steamer agent does

   not come within the first part of
section 2(o)
if the doctrine of noscitur a

   sociis is applied. He argued that a steamer agent is an agent of a

   disclosed principal, i.e. the ship-owner, and therefore cannot be made

   liable for demurrage charges. It is only an agent for loading and

   unloading of cargo, i.e. an agent of the consignor or consignee who

   can be made so liable. He went on to argue that a steamer agent must

   be distinguished from a stevedoring agent, and is not involved in

   loading and unloading cargo. He referred to various provisions of the

   MPT Act, and argued that
section 48(1)(d)
therein does not

   contemplate any liability on a steamer agent. This section has to be

   contrasted with
section 49(1)(c)
, which expressly contemplates liability

   on a steamer agent, but only with respect to land that is taken on lease

   from the Port Trust by the steamer agent. He relied heavily upon
15
sections 61 to 63 of the MPT Act to argue that when the goods are sold

by the public auction, a steamer agent has to be notified only because

the vessel owner may have a lien on such goods, which can be

enforced in its favour under section 60 of the MPT Act. Further, he

argued that it is made clear that if there is a surplus from the sale

proceeds, such surplus shall be paid only to the importer, owner or

consignee of the goods or their agent, from which list of persons the

ship-owner and its agent are conspicuously absent, making it clear that

it is the owner of the goods alone, or persons entitled to the goods, that

the Port Trust must chase for demurrage charges incurred after

landing.
He then argued that the passing of title under
section 1
of the

Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856 makes it clear that it is either the

consignor (before title passes) or the consignee (after title passes) that

can alone be made liable for payment of such charges. He also argued

that the obligation to clear goods imported which have been stored in

a warehouse are that of the importer, and for this he relied heavily on
section 49
of the Customs Act, 1962. He argued that this would also

make it clear that the steamer agent therefore does not come into the

picture. He further argued that the steamer agent has no bailor-bailee

relationship with the Port Trust, and joined Shri Pratap in relying upon
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra) and overruling of
Forbes-II
(supra).
To the
16
extent that
Rasiklal
(supra) has made observations against steamer

   agents, it is incorrect in law and should be overruled to this extent.
11. Shri Kavin Gulati, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of

   Hapag-Lloyd India Pvt. Ltd., a shipping agent and also an Intervenor

   in these proceedings, reiterated the submissions made by the

   predecessor counsel, and further stressed on
sections 29
,
30
,
33
,
45
,
48
and
150
of the Customs Act. He also argued that once goods have

   been landed, a ship-owner’s agent can never be made liable for

   demurrage charges, which should be to the account of the owner or

   the beneficial owner of the goods.
12. Having heard the learned Senior Counsel on behalf of all parties, it is

   necessary to first set out the relevant provisions of the MPT Act.
“
Section 2
. Definitions.-In this Act, unless the context
         otherwise requires,-
(f) “dock” includes all basins, locks, cuts, entrances, graving
         docks, graving blocks, inclined planes, slipways, gridirons,
         moorings, transit-sheds, warehouses, tramways, railways
         and other works and things appertaining to any dock, and
         also the portion of the sea enclosed or protected by the arms
         or groynes of a harbour;
xxx xxx xxx
(h) “goods” includes livestock and every kind of movable
         property;
xxx xxx xxx
(n) “master”, in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making
         use of any port, means any person having for the time being
17
the charge or control of such vessel or such aircraft, as the
case may be, except a pilot, harbour master, assistant
harbour master, dock master or berthing master of the port;
(o) “owner”,
(i) in relation to goods, includes any consignor, consignee,
shipper or agent for the sale, custody, loading or unloading
of such goods; and
(ii) in relation to any vessel or any aircraft making use of any
port, includes any part-owner, charterer, consignee, or
mortgagee in possession thereof;
xxx xxx xxx
(v) “rate” includes any toll, due, rent, rate, fee, or charge
leviable under this Act;
xxx xxx xxx

(z) “vessel” includes anything made for the conveyance,
mainly by water, of human beings or of goods and a
caisson;”

“42. Performance of services by Board or other
person.—(1) A Board shall have power to undertake the
following services:—
(a) landing, shipping or transhipping passengers and goods
between vessels in the port and the wharves, piers, quays
or docks belonging to or in the possession of the Board;
(b) receiving, removing, shifting, transporting, storing or
delivering goods brought within the Board’s premises;
(c) carrying passengers by rail or by other means within the
limits of the port or port approaches, subject to such
restrictions and conditions as the Central Government may
think fit to impose;
(d) receiving and delivering, transporting and booking and
despatching goods originating in the vessels in the port and
intended for carriage by the neighbouring railways, or vice
18
versa, as a railway administration under the
Indian Railways
Act, 1890
( 9 of 1890);
(e) piloting, hauling, mooring, remooring, hooking, or
measuring of vessels or any other service in respect of
vessels; and
(f) developing and providing, subject to the previous
approval of the Central Government, infrastructure facilities
for ports.
(2) A Board may, if so requested by the owner, take charge
of the goods for the purpose of performing the service or
services and shall give a receipt in such form as the Board
may specify.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the
Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central
Government, authorise any person to perform any of the
services mentioned in sub-section (1) on such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon.
(3A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (3), a
Board may, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, enter into any agreement or other
arrangement (whether by way of partnership, joint venture
or in any other manner) with, any body corporate or any
other person to perform any of the services and functions
assigned to the Board under this Act on such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon.
(4) No person authorised under sub-section (3) shall charge
or recover for such service any sum in excess of the amount
specified by the Authority, by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(5) Any such person shall, if so required by the owner,
perform in respect of goods any of the said services and for
that purpose take charge of the goods and give a receipt in
such form as the Board may specify.
(6) The responsibility of any such person for the loss,
destruction or deterioration of goods of which he has taken
charge shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be
19
that of a bailee under
sections 151
,
152
and
161
of the
Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872).
(7) After any goods have been taken charge of and a receipt
given for them under this section, no liability for any loss or
damage which may occur to them shall attach to any person
to whom a receipt has been given or to the master or owner
of the vessel from which the goods have been landed or
transhipped.
43. Responsibility of Board for loss, etc., of goods.—(1)
Subject to the provisions of this Act, the responsibility of any
Board for the loss, destruction or deterioration of goods of
which it has taken charge shall,—
(i) in the case of goods received for carriage by railway, be
governed by the provisions of the Indian Railways Act, 1890
(9 of 1890); and
(ii) in other cases, be that of a bailee under
sections 151
,
152
and
161
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872),
omitting the words “in the absence of any special contract”
in
section 152
of that Act:
Provided that no responsibility under this section shall attach
to the Board—
(a) until a receipt mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 42
is given by the Board; and
(b) after the expiry of such period as may be prescribed by
regulations from the date of taking charge of such goods by
the Board.
(2) A Board shall not be in any way responsible for the loss,
destruction or deterioration of, or damage to, goods of which
it has taken charge, unless notice of such loss or damage
has been given within such period as may be prescribed by
regulations made in this behalf from the date of taking
charge of such goods by the Board under sub-section (2) of
section 42
.”

“48. Scales of rates for services performed by Board or
other person.—(1) The Authority shall from time to time, by
20
notification in the Official Gazette, frame a scale of rates at
which, and a statement of conditions under which, any of the
services specified hereunder shall be performed by a Board
or any other person authorised under
section 42
at or in
relation to the port or port approaches—
(a) transhipping of passengers or goods between vessels in
the port or port approaches;
(b) landing and shipping of passengers or goods from or to
such vessels to or from any wharf, quay, jetty, pier, dock,
berth, mooring, stage or erection, land or building in the
possession or occupation of the Board or at any place within
the limits of the port or port approaches;
(c) cranage or porterage of goods on any such place;
(d) wharfage, storage or demurrage of goods on any such
place;
(e) any other service in respect of vessels, passengers or
goods.
(2) Different scales and conditions may be framed for
different classes of goods and vessels.”

“59. Board’s lien for rates.—(1) For the amount of all rates
leviable under this Act in respect of any goods, and for the
rent due to the Board for any buildings, plinths, stacking
areas, or other premises on or in which any goods may have
been placed, the Board shall have a lien on such goods, and
may seize and detain the same until such rates and rents
are fully paid.
(2) Such lien shall have priority over all other liens and
claims, except for general average and for the ship-owner’s
lien upon the said goods for freight and other charges where
such lien exists and has been preserved in the manner
provided in sub-section (1) of
section 60
, and for money
payable to the Central Government under any law for the
time being in force relating to customs, other than by way of
penalty or fine.
21
60. Ship-owner's lien for freight and other charges.—(1)
If the master or owner of any vessel or his agent, at or before
the time of landing from such vessel any goods at any dock,
wharf, quay, stage, jetty, berth, mooring or pier belonging to
or in the occupation of a Board, gives to the Board a notice
in writing that such goods are to remain subject to a lien for
freight or other charges payable to the ship-owner, to an
amount to be mentioned in such notice, such goods shall
continue to be liable to such lien to such amount.

(2) The goods shall be retained in the custody of the Board
at the risk and expense of the owners of the goods until such
lien is discharged as hereinafter mentioned; and godown or
storage rent shall be payable by the party entitled to such
goods for the time during which they may be so retained.

(3) Upon the production before any officer appointed by the
Board in that behalf of a document purporting to be a receipt
for, or release from, the amount of such lien, executed by
the person by whom or on whose behalf such notice has
been given, the Board may permit such goods to be
removed without regard to such lien, provided that the Board
shall have used reasonable care in respect to the
authenticity of such document.
61. Sale of goods after two months if rates or rent are
not paid or lien for freight is not discharged.—(1) A
Board may, after the expiry of two months from the time
when any goods have passed into its custody, or in the case
of animals and perishable or hazardous goods after the
expiry of such shorter period not being less than twenty-four
hours after the landing of the animals or goods as the Board
may think fit, sell by public auction or in such cases as the
Board considers it necessary so to do, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, sell by tender, private agreement or in
any other manner such goods or so much thereof as, in the
opinion of the Board, may be necessary—
(a) if any rates payable to the Board in respect of such goods
have not been paid, or
22
(b) if any rent payable to the Board in respect of any place
on or in which such goods have been stored has not been
paid, or
(c) if any lien of any ship-owner for freight or other charge of
which notice has been given has not been discharged and if
the person claiming such lien for freight or other Charges
has made to the Board an application for such sale.

(2) Before making such sale, the Board shall give ten days’
notice of the same by publication thereof in the Port Gazette,
or where there is no Port Gazette, in the Official Gazette and
also in at least one of the principal local daily newspapers:
Provided that in the case of animals and perishable or
hazardous goods, the Board may give such shorter notice
and in such manner as, in the opinion of the Board, the
urgency of the case admits of.
(3) If the address of the owner of the goods has been stated
on the manifest of the goods or in any of the documents
which have come into the hands of the Board, or is otherwise
known notice shall also be given to him by letter delivered at
such address, or sent by post, but the title of a bona fide
purchaser of such goods shall not be invalidated by a reason
of the omission to send such notice, nor shall any such
purchaser be bound to inquire whether such notice has been
sent.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, arms
and ammunition and controlled goods may be sold at such
time and in such manner as the Central Government may
direct.
Explanation.—In this section and
section 62
—
(a) “arms and ammunition” have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the
Arms Act, 1959
(54 of 1959);
(b) “controlled goods” means goods the price or disposal of
which is regulated under any law for the time being in force.
62. Disposal of goods not removed from premises of
Board within time limit.—(1) Notwithstanding anything
23
contained in this Act, where any goods placed in the custody
of the Board upon the landing thereof are not removed by
the owner or other person entitled thereto from the premises
of the Board within one month from the date on which such
goods were placed in their custody, the Board may, if the
address of such owner or person is known, cause a notice
to be served upon him by letter delivered at such address or
sent by post, or if the notice cannot be so served upon him
or his address is not known, cause a notice to be published
in the Port Gazette or where there is no Port Gazette, in the
Official Gazette and also in at least one of the principal local
daily newspapers, requiring him to remove the goods
forthwith and stating that in default of compliance therewith
the goods are liable to be sold by public auction or by tender,
private agreement or in any other manner:
Provided that where all the rates and charges payable under
this Act in respect of any such goods have been paid, no
notice of removal shall be so served or published under this
sub-section unless two months have expired from the date
on which the goods were placed in the custody of the Board.
(2) The notice referred to in sub-section (1) may also be
served on the agents of the vessel by which such goods
were landed.
(3) If such owner or person does not comply with the
requisition in the notice served upon him or published under
sub-section (1), the Board may, at any time after the
expiration of two months from the date on which such goods
were placed in its custody, sell the goods by public auction
or in such cases as the Board considers it necessary so to
do, for reason to be recorded in writing sell by tender, private
agreement or in any other manner after giving notice of the
sale in the manner specified in sub-sections (2) and (3) of
section 61
.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) or
sub-section (3)—
(a) the Board may, in the case of animals and perishable or
hazardous goods, give notice of removal of such goods
although the period of one month or, as the case may be, of
24
two months specified in sub-section (1) has not expired or
give such shorter notice of sale and in such manner as, in
the opinion of the Board, the urgency of the case requires;
(b) arms and ammunition and controlled goods may be sold
in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (4) of
section 61
.
(5) The Central Government may, if it deems necessary so
to do in the public interest, by notification in the Official
Gazette, exempt any goods or classes of goods from the
operation of this section.
63. Application of sale proceeds.—(1) The proceeds of
every sale under
section 61
or
section 62
shall be applied in
the following order—
(a) in payment of the expenses of the sale;
(b) in payment, according to their respective priorities, of the
liens and claims excepted in sub-section (2) of
section 59
from the priority of the lien of the Board;
(c) in payment of the rates and expenses of landing,
removing, storing or warehousing the same, and of all other
charges due to the Board in respect thereof, including
demurrage (other than penal demurrage) payable in respect
of such goods for a period of four months from the date of
landing;
(d) in payment of any penalty or fine due to the Central
Government under any law for the time being in force
relating to customs;
(e) in payment of any other sum due to the Board.
(2) The surplus, if any, shall be paid to the importer, owner
or consignee of the goods or to his agent, on an application
made by him in this behalf within six months from the date
of the sale of the goods.
(3) Where no application has been made under sub-section
(2), the surplus shall be applied by the Board for the
purposes of this Act.
25
64. Recovery of rates and charges by distraint of
vessel.—(1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which
any rates or penalties are payable under this Act, or under
any regulations or orders made in pursuance thereof,
refuses or neglects to pay the same or any part thereof on
demand, the Board may distrain or arrest such vessel and
the tackle, apparel and furniture belonging thereto, or any
part thereof, and detain the same until the amount so due to
the Board, together with such further amount as may accrue
for any period during which the vessel is under distraint or
arrest, is paid.
(2) In case any part of the said rates or penalties, or of the
cost of the distress or arrest, or of the keeping of the same,
remains unpaid for the space of five days next after any such
distress or arrest has been so made, the Board may cause
the vessel or other things so distrained or arrested to be
sold, and, with the proceeds of such sale, shall satisfy such
rates or penalties and costs, including the costs of sale
remaining unpaid, rendering the surplus (if any) to the
master of such vessel on demand.
65. Grant of port-clearance after payment of rates and
realisation of damages, etc.—If a Board gives to the officer
of the Central Government whose duty it is to grant the port-
clearance to any vessel at the port, a notice stating,—
(i) that an amount specified therein is due in respect of rates,
fines, penalties or expenses chargeable under this Act or
under any regulations or orders made in pursuance thereof,
against such vessel, or by the owner or master of such
vessel in respect thereof, or against or in respect of any
goods on board such vessel; or
(ii) that an amount specified therein is due in respect of any
damage referred to in
section 116
and such amount together
with the cost of the proceedings for the recovery thereof
before a Magistrate under that section has not been
realised,

such officer shall not grant such port-clearance until the
amount so chargeable or due has been paid or, as the case
may be, the damage and cost have been realised.”
26
“123. General power of Board to make regulations.—
        Without prejudice to any power to make regulations
        contained elsewhere in this Act, a Board may make
        regulations consistent with this Act for all or any of the
        following purposes, namely:—

        xxx xxx xxx
(c) for the form of receipt to be given under sub-section (2)
        of
section 42
;
(d) for the period within which notice may be given under
        sub-section (2) of
section 43
;
xxx xxx xxx
(i) for the mode of payment of rates leviable by the Board
        under this Act;”

        “131. Alternative remedy by suit.—Without prejudice to
        any other action that may be taken under this Act, a Board
        may recover by suit any rates, damages, expenses, costs,
        or in the case of sale the balance thereof, when the proceeds
        of sale are insufficient, or any penalties payable to, or
        recoverable by, the Board under this Act or under any
        regulations made in pursuance thereof.”
13. Since certain provisions of the
Customs Act, 1962
were relied upon

   during the course of arguments, they are also set out as follows:
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise
        requires,—

        xxx xxx xxx

        (26) ―“importer”, in relation to any goods at any time
        between their importation and the time when they are
        cleared for home consumption, includes any owner,
        beneficial owner or any person holding himself out to be the
        importer;”

        “29. Arrival of vessels and aircrafts in India.—(1) The
        person-in-charge of a vessel or an aircraft entering India
27
from any place outside India shall not cause or permit the
vessel or aircraft to call or land—
(a) for the first time after arrival in India; or
(b) at any time while it is carrying passengers or cargo
brought in that vessel or aircraft,

at any place other than a customs port or a customs airport,
as the case may be unless permitted by the Board.
30. Delivery of arrival manifest or import manifest or
import report.—(1) The person-in-charge of —
(i) a vessel; or
(ii) an aircraft; or
(iii) a vehicle,

carrying imported goods or export goods or any other person
as may be specified by the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf shall, in the
case of a vessel or an aircraft, deliver to the proper officer
an arrival manifest or import manifest by presenting
electronically prior to the arrival of the vessel or the aircraft,
as the case may be, and in the case of a vehicle, an import
report within twelve hours after its arrival in the customs
station, in such form and manner as may be prescribed and
if the arrival manifest or import manifest or the import report
or any part thereof, is not delivered to the proper officer
within the time specified in this sub-section and if the proper
officer is satisfied that there was no sufficient cause for such
delay, the person-in-charge or any other person referred to
in this sub-section, who caused such delay, shall be liable to
a penalty not exceeding fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or
Commissioner of Customs may, in cases where it is not
feasible to deliver arrival manifest or import manifest by
presenting electronically, allow the same to be delivered in
any other manner.
28
(2) The person delivering the arrival manifest or import
manifest or import report shall at the foot thereof make and
subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of its contents.
(3) If the proper officer is satisfied that the arrival manifest or
import manifest or import report is in any way incorrect or
incomplete, and that there was no fraudulent intention, he
may permit it to be amended or supplemented.”

“33. Unloading and loading of goods at approved places
only.—Except with the permission of the proper officer, no
imported goods shall be unloaded, and no export goods
shall be loaded, at any place other than a place approved
under clause (a) of
section 8
for the unloading or loading of
such goods.”

“45. Restrictions on custody and removal of imported
goods.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in any law for the
time being in force, all imported goods unloaded in a
customs area shall remain in the custody of such person as
may be approved by the Principal Commissioner of Customs
or Commissioner of Customs until they are cleared for home
consumption or are warehoused or are transhipped in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VIII.
46. Entry of goods on importation.—(1) The importer of
any goods, other than goods intended for transit or
transhipment, shall make entry thereof by presenting
electronically on the customs automated system to the
proper officer a bill of entry for home consumption or
warehousing in such form and manner as may be
prescribed:
Provided that the Principal Commissioner of Customs or
Commissioner of Customs may, in cases where it is not
feasible to make entry by presenting electronically on the
customs automated system, allow an entry to be presented
in any other manner:
Provided further that if the importer makes and subscribes
to a declaration before the proper officer, to the effect that
he is unable for want of full information to furnish all the
particulars of the goods required under this sub-section, the
29
proper officer may, pending the production of such
information, permit him, previous to the entry thereof (a) to
examine the goods in the presence of an officer of customs,
or (b) to deposit the goods in a public warehouse appointed
under
section 57
without warehousing the same.
(2) Save as otherwise permitted by the proper officer, a bill
of entry shall include all the goods mentioned in the bill of
lading or other receipt given by the carrier to the consignor.
(3) The importer shall present the bill of entry under sub-
section (1) before the end of the next day following the day
(excluding holidays) on which the aircraft or vessel or vehicle
carrying the goods arrives at a customs station at which such
goods are to be cleared for home consumption or
warehousing:
Provided that a bill of entry may be presented at any time
not exceeding thirty days prior to the expected arrival of the
aircraft or vessel or vehicle by which the goods have been
shipped for importation into India:
Provided further that where the bill of entry is not presented
within the time so specified and the proper officer is satisfied
that there was no sufficient cause for such delay, the
importer shall pay such charges for late presentation of the
bill of entry as may be prescribed.
(4) The importer while presenting a bill of entry shall make
and subscribe to a declaration as to the truth of the contents
of such bill of entry and shall, in support of such declaration,
produce to the proper officer the invoice, if any, and such
other documents relating to the imported goods as may be
prescribed.
(4A) The importer who presents a bill of entry shall ensure
the following, namely:—
(a) the accuracy and completeness of the information given
therein;
(b) the authenticity and validity of any document supporting
it; and
30
(c) compliance with the restriction or prohibition, if any,
relating to the goods under this Act or under any other law
for the time being in force.
(5) If the proper officer is satisfied that the interests of
revenue are not prejudicially affected and that there was no
fraudulent intention, he may permit substitution of a bill of
entry for home consumption for a bill of entry for
warehousing or vice versa.”

“48. Procedure in case of goods not cleared,
warehoused, or transhipped within thirty days after
unloading.—If any goods brought into India from a place
outside India are not cleared for home consumption or
warehoused or transhipped within thirty days from the date
of the unloading thereof at a customs station or within such
further time as the proper officer may allow or if the title to
any imported goods is relinquished, such goods may, after
notice to the importer and with the permission of the proper
officer be sold by the person having the custody thereof:
Provided that —
(a) animals, perishable goods and hazardous goods, may,
with the permission of the proper officer, be sold at any time;
(b) arms and ammunition may be sold at such time and place
and in such manner as the Central Government may direct.
Explanation.— In this section, ― “arms” and “ammunition”
have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the
Arms Act, 1959
(54 of 1959).
49. Storage of imported goods in warehouse pending
clearance or removal.—Where,––
(a) in the case of any imported goods, whether dutiable or
not, entered for home consumption, the Assistant
Commissioner of Customs or Deputy Commissioner of
Customs is satisfied on the application of the importer that
the goods cannot be cleared within a reasonable time;
(b) in the case of any imported dutiable goods, entered for
warehousing, the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or
Deputy Commissioner of Customs is satisfied on the
31
application of the importer that the goods cannot be
removed for deposit in a warehouse within a reasonable
time,

the goods may pending clearance or removal, as the case
may be, be permitted to be stored in a public warehouse for
a period not exceeding thirty days:
Provided that the provisions of Chapter IX shall not apply to
goods permitted to be stored in a public warehouse under
this section:
Provided further that the Principal Commissioner of
Customs or Commissioner of Customs may extend the
period of storage for a further period not exceeding thirty
days at a time.”

“150. Procedure for sale of goods and application of sale
proceeds.—(1) Where any goods not being confiscated
goods are to be sold under any provisions of this Act, they
shall, after notice to the owner thereof, be sold by public
auction or by tender or with the consent of the owner in any
other manner.
(2) The proceeds of any such sale shall be applied—
(a) firstly to the payment of the expenses of the sale,
(b) next to the payment of the freight and other charges, if
any, payable in respect of the goods sold, to the carrier, if
notice of such charges has been given to the person having
custody of the goods,
(c) next to the payment of the duty, if any, on the goods sold,
(d) next to the payment of the charges in respect of the
goods sold due to the person having the custody of the
goods,
(e) next to the payment of any amount due from the owner
of the goods to the Central Government under the provisions
of this Act or any other law relating to customs, and the
balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the goods.
32
Provided that where it is not possible to pay the balance of
         sale proceeds, if any, to the owner of the goods within a
         period of six months from the date of sale of such goods or
         such further period as the Commissioner of Customs may
         allow, such balance of sale proceeds shall be paid to the
         Central Government.”
14. A perusal of the relevant provisions of the MPT Act would show that

   when
section 2(o)
defines “owner”, it defines owner in relation to goods

   separately from owner in relation to any vessel. In sub-clause (i) of
section 2(o)
, when owner is defined in relation to “goods”, the definition

   is an inclusive one. Secondly, it includes persons who are owners of

   the goods, or persons beneficially entitled to the goods, such as the

   consignor, consignee and the shipper and then also includes agents

   for sale, custody, loading or unloading of such goods. Ordinarily,

   agents for the sale or custody of goods would relate only to agents of

   the owner or persons beneficially entitled to such goods, which would

   certainly exclude the ship-owner and the ship-owner’s agent.

   However, considering the fact that the definition is an inclusive

   definition, and that loading or unloading of goods can take place by the

   steamer’s agent, as was held in
Rowther-I
(supra), it is difficult to

   accept the contention on behalf of the steamer’s agent that such

   persons would not be included within the definition of “owner” under

   the MPT Act.
33
15. For these reasons, it is not possible to apply the doctrine of noscitur a

   sociis to the definition of “owner” under
section 2(o)
, as was contended

   by the learned Senior Advocates appearing on behalf of the steamer

   agents.   In   Brindavan     Bangle    Stores    and    Ors.   v.   Asst.

   Commissioner of Commercial Taxes and Anr. (2000) 1 SCC 674,

   this Court held:
“7. The second contention raised on behalf of the appellants
         related to the clarity and ambiguity of Entry 30 and Entry 54
         and application of such construction of noscitur à sociis. In
         our opinion the learned Division Bench of the Karnataka
         High Court has rightly held that the said rule of construction
         has no application to the facts and circumstances of the
         case. This Court in
State of Bombay v. Hospital Mazdoor
         Sabha
[AIR 1960 SC 610] has considered in detail the rule
         of construction noscitur à sociis and in para 9, it is observed
         thus:
“We are not impressed by this argument. It must be borne in
         mind that noscitur à sociis is merely a rule of construction
         and it cannot prevail in cases where it is clear that the wider
         words have been deliberately used in order to make the
         scope of the defined word correspondingly wider. It is only
         where the intention of the legislature in associating wider
         words with words of narrower significance is doubtful, or
         otherwise not clear that the present rule of construction can
         be usefully applied. It can also be applied where the
         meaning of the words of wider import is doubtful; but, where
         the object of the legislature in using wider words is clear and
         free of ambiguity, the rule of construction in question cannot
         be pressed into service.”
8. As stated earlier on reading Entry 30 and Entry 54, we
         have no manner of doubt that there is neither any ambiguity
         nor do they lack any clarity. The legislature intended to levy
         and collect entry tax on the articles mentioned in both these
         entries. The words used therein are of wider import and
         clearly indicate that all articles made of glass or made from
34
all kinds of all forms of plastic including articles made of
         polypropylene, polystyrene and like materials are subjected
         to payment of entry tax. It cannot be disputed that the articles
         in question, namely, bangles are made of glass and/or made
         of plastic etc. The impugned judgment has very succinctly
         dealt with the contentions raised on behalf of both the parties
         and also dealt with the various reported decisions of this
         Court and other High Courts in great length. We are in
         complete agreement with the view taken by the Division
         Bench.”
16. In the present case, we find no lack of clarity in the expression “agent

   for the…loading or unloading of such goods”, as including persons who

   may be the vessel’s agent involved in unloading goods. As the

   definition of “owner” is inclusive, as stated hereinabove, the non-

   mention of the ship-owner in the first part of the definition makes no

   difference, as it would be incongruous to hold that the shipowner’s

   agent is included in the latter part of the definition, but not the ship-

   owner itself, which would indicate that the maxim noscitur a sociis

   cannot apply.
17. This becomes even clearer when
section 42
is perused. Under
section

   42(1)
, a Board shall have power to undertake services insofar as

   landing, shipping or transhipping goods between vessels in the port

   and the wharves, piers, quays or docks belonging to or in the

   possession of the Board, referring clearly, therefore, to services

   rendered to the vessel (see
section 42(1)(a)
). Insofar as receiving,

   removing, shifting, or transporting goods is concerned, these could be
35
services to both the vessel as well as the owner/person entitled to the

goods. The moot question is, when it comes to “storing” goods brought

within the Board’s premises, whether such service could be said to be

a service rendered to the vessel or its agent (see
section 42(1)(b)
).

Some of the pivotal provisions of the MPT Act, insofar as the present

questions are involved, are contained in
sections 42(2)
,
42(7)
and
43
of the Act. Under
section 42(2)
, a Board may, if so requested by the

“owner”, take charge of the goods for the purpose of performing

services, and shall give a receipt in such form as the Board may

specify. It is obvious that if the ship-owner or its agent are not “owners”,

the Board cannot take the charge of the goods from the ship-owner or

its agent for the purpose of performing services, a result which would

lead to startling consequences. Secondly, under sub-section (7), once

goods have been taken charge of and a receipt given for them, no

liability for any loss or damage which may occur to them shall attach to

any person to whom a receipt has been given (this would include any

of the persons mentioned in
section 2(o)(i)
, including the vessel’s

agents), or to the master or owner of the vessel from which the goods

have been landed or transhipped. This would again make it clear that

the master or owner of the vessel and their agents, from this point on,

have been absolved from liability for loss or damage to the goods, as
36
the Board has now taken over the custody of the goods from such

   master or owner of the vessel. From this point on, therefore, the master

   or owner of the vessel and their agents cease to have any liability qua

   the goods, inasmuch as the Port Trust has now taken them over.

   Concomitantly, under
section 43(1)(ii)
, the responsibility of the Port

   Trust for loss, destruction or deterioration of goods of which it has

   taken charge from this point of time onwards now becomes that of a

   bailee under
sections 151
,
152
and
161
of the Indian Contract Act,

   1872, omitting the words “in the absence of any special contract” in
section 152
of the Contract Act. This responsibility attaches only after

   a receipt is given by the Board, and notice of loss or damage has been

   given, after expiry of such period (as may be prescribed) from the

   crucial date on which the Port Trust takes charge of the goods.
18. At this juncture, it is important to state that arguments have been made

   based on observations contained in various judgments in which
sections 42 (5)
and (6) of the MPT Act have been referred.
Sections

   42(5)
and (6) have no application to the Board, as they apply only to

   the “person” authorised under
section 42(3)
by the Board to perform

   services mentioned in sub-section (1).
19. Again, under
section 48
, a distinction is made between landing of

   goods from a vessel, and storage or demurrage charges in respect of
37
goods – see
section 48(1)(b)
, as contrasted with
section 48(1)(d)
.

   When it comes to services performed on vessels, sections 49A, 49B,
50
, 50A and 50B make it clear that the services rendered to vessels

   for which dues have to be paid by vessels are entirely separate and

   distinct from services rendered insofar as goods that are landed are

   concerned.
20. Coming to
section 59
, it becomes clear that for all rates leviable under

   the MPT Act, which includes rates leviable for storage of goods, the

   Board shall have a lien on such goods, and may, after custody of such

   goods is taken by the Port Trust, then seize and detain the same until

   such rates are fully paid.
21.
Section 60
is also important, in that the ship-owner’s lien for freight and

   other charges is recognised if, at or before the time of landing of any

   goods from such vessel, such freight or other charges have not been

   paid. Under
section 60(2)
, the goods shall be retained in the custody

   of the Board at the risk and expense of the owners of the goods until

   such lien is discharged. Most importantly, godown or storage rent shall

   be payable by “the party entitled to such goods” for the time during

   which they may be so retained. This section is of crucial importance,

   as it makes it clear that godown or storage rent is payable only by the

   party entitled to such goods, which can never be the ship-owner or the
38
ship-owner’s agent after the goods have been landed, and the vessel

   has sailed away from the port. Further, under
section 61
, after two

   months from the time goods have passed into the Board’s custody, the

   Board may, if it thinks fit, sell – by the modalities laid down – such

   goods or so much thereof as may be necessary to recover the rates

   payable to the Board which remain unpaid. Sub-section (3) of
section

   61
is very important, in that before making such sale, if the address of

   the “owner of the goods” which has been stated on the manifest, or in

   other documents that have come into the hands of the Board, or is

   otherwise known, notice of such sale must be given to such owner.
22.
Section 62
speaks of the disposal of goods that have not been

   removed from the premises of the Board within time, and speaks of

   their removal by the “owner or other person entitled thereto”. Under

   sub-section (2) of
section 62
, where such goods are proposed to be

   removed or sold, a notice may also be served on the “agents of the

   vessel by which such goods were landed”. This is for the reason that

   the vessel’s agents may have indicated that the ship-owner has a lien

   for freight and other charges, which must be satisfied out of the sale of

   such goods. The important point to be noted is that a clear distinction

   is made between an “owner or other person entitled” to goods, and

   agents of the vessel. Further, under sub-section (3) of
section 62
, it is
39
only if the owner or person entitled to goods does not comply with the

   requisition in the notice, that the Board may, at any time after the

   expiration of two months from the date on which such goods were

   placed in its custody, then sell the goods in the manner indicated. The

   scheme of
section 62
, therefore, is that when it comes to sale of goods

   which are lying stored in the premises of the Board, notice is to be

   given only to the owner, or other persons who are beneficially entitled

   to the goods, who must then comply with the requisition given and

   remove the goods. At this juncture, the ship-owner or its agents are not

   persons who have to comply with such requisition, as they are neither

   persons who are the owner, or other persons entitled to the goods. The

   notice issued to the agent of the vessel is only for the limited purpose

   as aforesaid. This again indicates that goods that are stored on the

   premises of the Board have a nexus only with the owner or other

   persons entitled to those goods, and not with the agent of the vessel

   or the vessel itself.
23.
Section 63
is again very important. When goods have been sold and a

   surplus exists, the surplus shall be paid to only three persons or their

   agents, namely, the “importer”, “owner” or “consignee” of the goods.

   In this sub-section, namely, 63(2), as in the case of “owner’ under
section 61(3)
, the owner of the goods is obviously not the “owner” as
40
defined under
section 2(o)
, as the context of
section 63(2)
indicates

   otherwise. There would have been no need to add “importer” or

   “consignee” in this sub-section, as they are already subsumed within

   the wider definition of “owner” in relation to goods under
section 2(o)
.

   Secondly, what is conspicuous by its absence is mention of the vessel

   or any agent for loading or unloading goods. As a matter of fact, when

   it comes to recovery of rates and charges against the vessel, a

   separate remedy is provided for in sections 64 and 65 of the MPT Act.
24. The statutory scheme of the MPT Act now becomes crystal clear. Until

   the stage of landing and removal to a place of storage, the steamer’s

   agent or the vessel itself may be made liable for rates payable by the

   vessel for services performed to the vessel. Post landing and removal

   to a place of storage, detention charges for goods that are stored, and

   demurrage payable thereon from this point on, i.e. when the Port Trust

   takes charge of the goods from the vessel, or from any other person

   who can be said to be owner as defined under
section 2(o)
, it is only

   the owner of the goods or other persons entitled to the goods (who

   may be beneficially entitled as well) that the Port Trust has to look to

   for payment of storage or demurrage charges.
25. At this juncture, the
Customs Act, 1962
also becomes relevant. Under
section 2(26)
, “importer” is defined as including any owner, beneficial
41
owner or any person holding himself out to be the importer. Though

   this definition does not ipso facto apply to the MPT Act, it is important

   that the two Acts be read together, as both Acts deal with goods that

   are imported into the country from abroad, and their storage and

   disposal thereafter. In any event, the expression “importer” that occurs

   in section 63(2) of the MPT Act would certainly include a beneficial

   owner of the goods.
26. Under
section 29
of the Customs Act, the person-in-charge of a vessel

   when it carries cargo can land only at a “customs port” (as defined),

   unless otherwise permitted by the Central Board of Excise. Under
section 30
, the person-in-charge of a vessel carrying imported goods

   shall deliver to the “proper officer”, i.e. a customs officer, an import

   manifest of the vessel within the time prescribed, which would indicate

   the nature of the goods carried by the vessel, and the consignee or

   other owner of the goods. Under
section 33
, no such imported goods

   can be unloaded at any place other than the place approved for

   unloading of such goods in the customs port, customs airport or coastal

   port. Under
section 45(1)
, all imported goods unloaded in a customs

   area shall remain in the custody of such person as approved by the

   Principal Commissioner of Customs or Commissioner of Customs until

   they are cleared for home consumption or are warehoused or
42
transhipped.
Section 46(1)
is extremely important in that it speaks of a

   bill of entry for home consumption or warehousing in such form and

   manner as may be prescribed.
Section 46(2)
then states that a bill of

   entry shall include all the goods mentioned in the bill of lading or other

   receipt given by the carrier to the consignor. Under
section 48
, if any

   goods brought into India from a place outside India are not cleared for

   home consumption or warehoused or transhipped within 30 days from

   the date of the unloading, such goods may, after notice to the

   “importer” and with permission of the proper officer, be sold by the

   person having the custody thereof.
27. Under
section 49
, imported goods may, pending clearance or removal,

   be permitted to be stored in a public warehouse for a period not

   exceeding 30 days, or such other extended period that the Principal

   Commissioner or Commissioner of Customs may permit.
The Customs

   Act
, therefore, also contains parallel provisions for authorities under

   that Act to take charge of, store, and sell imported goods, in the

   circumstances mentioned therein.
28. It was argued that carrying goods in a container would, in any case,

   make a difference to the position that only the owner of the goods or

   person entitled to the goods is liable to pay for demurrage. According

   to the Port Trust, when goods are imported in a container, and the
43
container is then landed without the goods being destuffed, and the

   container belongs to the ship-owner’s agent and has to be returned to

   the ship-owner’s agent, for the duration that the container takes up

   storage space, storage charges will have to be paid by the ship-

   owner’s agent. Let us examine whether this argument is sound in law.
29.
Under the Customs Act, 1962
, customs duties are levied on goods

   imported into India. “Import” has been defined in
section 2(23)
of the

   Customs Act as the “bringing into India from a place outside India”.

   Thus, import of goods can only be said to be complete after they cross

   into the territorial waters of India, and become part of the mass of

   goods within India. This is the law
laid down by
this Court in
Garden

   Silk Mills Ltd. and Anr v. Union of India and Ors.
(1999) 8 SCC 744,

   as follows:
“17. It was further submitted that in the case of Apar (P)
        Ltd. [(1999) 6 SCC 117] this Court was concerned with
Sections 14
and
15
but here we have to construe the word
        “imported” occurring in
Section 12
and this can only mean
        that the moment goods have entered the territorial waters
        the import is complete. We do not agree with the submission.
        This Court in its opinion in Bill to Amend Section 20 of the
        Sea Customs Act, 1878 and
Section 3
of the Central Excises
        and Salt Act, 1944, Re observed as follows:
“Truly speaking, the imposition of an import duty, by and
        large, results in a condition which must be fulfilled before the
        goods can be brought inside the customs barriers, i.e.,
        before they form part of the mass of goods within the
        country.”
44
18. It would appear to us that the import of goods into India
        would commence when the same cross into the territorial
        waters but continues and is completed when the goods
        become part of the mass of goods within the country; the
        taxable event being reached at the time when the goods
        reach the customs barriers and the bill of entry for home
        consumption is filed.”
30. Likewise, in
Mangalore Refinery & Petrochemicals Ltd. v.

  Commissioner of Customs
(2016) 14 SCC 709, this Court dealt with

  when an import could be said to be complete under the
Customs Act
.

  After referring to various provisions of the
Customs Act
, this Court held:
“9. On a reading of the aforesaid provisions, it is clear that
        the levy of customs duty under
Section 12
is only on goods
        imported into India. Goods are said to be imported into India
        when they are brought into India from a place outside India.
        Unless such goods are brought into India, the act of
        importation which triggers the levy does not take place. If the
        goods are pilfered after they are unloaded or lost or
        destroyed at any time before clearance for home
        consumption or deposit in a warehouse, the importer is not
        liable to pay the duty leviable on such goods. This is for the
        reason that the import of goods does not take place until they
        become part of the land mass of India and until the act of
        importation is complete which under
Sections 13
and
23
happens only after an order for clearance for home
        consumption is made and/or an order permitting the deposit
        of goods in a warehouse is made. Under
Section 23(2)
the
        owner of the imported goods may also at any time before
        such orders have been made relinquish his title to the goods
        and shall not be liable to pay any duty thereon. In short, he
        may abandon the said goods even after they have physically
        landed at any port in India but before any of the aforesaid
        orders have been made. This again is for the good reason
        that the act of importation is only complete when goods are
        in the hands of the importer after they have been cleared
        either for home consumption or for deposit in a warehouse.
        Further, as per
Section 47
of the Customs Act, the importer
        has to pay import duty only on goods that are entered for
45
home consumption. Obviously, the quantity of goods
imported will be the quantity of goods at the time they are
entered for home consumption.
xxx xxx xxx
14. We are afraid that each one of the reasons given by the
Tribunal is incorrect in law. The Tribunal has lost sight of the
following first principles when it arrived at the aforesaid
conclusion. First, it has lost sight of the fact that a levy in the
context of import duty can only be on imported goods, that
is, on goods brought into India from a place outside of India.
Till that is done, there is no charge to tax. This Court
in
Garden Silk Mills Ltd. v. Union of India
, stated that this
takes place, as follows:
“17. It was further submitted that in Apar (P) Ltd. [Union of
India v. Apar (P) Ltd., (1999) 6 SCC 117] this Court was
concerned with
Sections 14
and
15
but here we have to
construe the word “imported” occurring in
Section 12
and
this can only mean that the moment goods have entered the
territorial waters the import is complete. We do not agree
with the submission. This Court in its opinion in Sea
Customs Act, 1878,
S. 20(2)
, In re [Sea Customs Act, 1878,
S. 20(2)
, In re, AIR 1963 SC 1760] SCR at p. 823 observed
as follows:
‘26. … Truly speaking, the imposition of an import duty, by
and large, results in a condition which must be fulfilled before
the goods can be brought inside the customs barriers i.e.
before they form part of the mass of goods within the
country.’
18. It would appear to us that the import of goods into India
would commence when the same cross into the territorial
waters but continues and is completed when the goods
become part of the mass of goods within the country; the
taxable event being reached at the time when the goods
reach the customs barriers and the bill of entry for home
consumption is filed.”
46
31. However, another line of judgments deals with what was called the

   “original package” doctrine laid down by Chief Justice Marshall of the

   US Supreme Court in Brown v. State of Maryland 25 U.S. 419 (1827).

   This judgment laid down that while the goods imported remained the

   property of the importer in the original form of packaging in which it

   was imported, a tax upon it would be “imposts or duties on imports”

   without the consent of the Congress, violating
section 10(2)
of Article I

   of the US Constitution. In addition, any such “impost or duty” would

   also violate the Commerce clause under
section 8(3)
of Article I of the

   said Constitution, which grants power to the Congress to regulate

   commerce with foreign nations. Thus, a State legislature has no power

   to impose an “impost or duty” upon the first sale of the commodity so

   long as it remained in the importer’s hands1.
32. This doctrine has been the subject-matter of comment in a variety of

   different situations. Thus, in the
Province of Madras v. Boddu

   Paidanna
& sons, A.I.R. (29) 1942 Federal Court 33 (at page 37), in

   the context of sales tax legislation by the States, the Federal Court


   1 In two later judgments of the US Supreme Court, Michelin Tire Corporation v.
   Wages 423 U.S. 276 (1976) and Limbach v. Hoover & Allison Company 466 U.S.
   353 (1984), judgments following Brown (supra) enunciating the “original package”
   doctrine were reversed, stating that non-discriminatory taxes which did not fall on
   imports as such, or interfere with the free flow of imported goods amongst the States,
   could not be said to be contrary to the Commerce clause or contrary to
Section 10(2)
of Article I of the US Constitution. A different approach was adopted to
Section 10(2)
of Article I, ignoring the question whether the goods were imported, and instead
   analysing the nature of the tax to determine whether it was an “impost or duty”.
47
referred to Chief Justice Marshall’s judgment, and distinguished the

  same, saying that it would apply to the Commerce clause in the US

  Constitution, and would not apply by analogy to the legislative entries

  under the
Seventh Schedule of the Government of India Act
(1935).
Likewise, in
State of Bombay and Anr. v. F.N. Balsara
1951 SCR

  682, in the context of a law passed by the Legislature of the Province

  of Bombay relating to prohibition of intoxicating liquors, an argument

  based on Chief Justice Marshall’s dictum in Brown (supra) was made,

  stating that in pith and substance such law would relate to import and

  export of intoxicating liquors, and therefore be void.
This was turned

  down, referring to
Boddu Paidanna
(supra), stating that in the

  American judgment the widest meaning could be given to the

  Commerce clause as there was no question of reconciling that clause

  with another clause containing the legislative power of the State – see

  pages 696 to 700.
33.
In
Central India Spinning and Weaving and Manufacturing

  Company, Ltd. v. The Municipal Committee, Wardha
1958 SCR

  1102, this Court, in the context of a terminal tax, relied upon the dictum

  of Chief Justice Marshall in Brown (supra) in order to answer the

  question before it, namely, whether a terminal tax can be levied on
48
goods which are in transit. The question was answered in the negative

   – see pages 1114 and 1121.
34.
In
Gramophone Company of India Ltd. v. Birendra Bahadur

   Pandey & Ors.
(1984) 2
SCR 664, Central India Spinning and

   Weaving
(supra) was distinguished, and
Boddu Paidanna
(supra)

   and
F.N. Balsara
(supra) were relied upon, to interpret the word

   “import” as found in the
Copyright Act, 1957
. Cases under the
Customs

   Act
were expressly distinguished by this judgment as follows:
“The learned counsel for the appellant invited our attention
           to Radhakishan v. Union       of    India [1965    2    SCR
           213];
Shawhney v. Sylvania and Laxman
[77 Bom LR
           380];
Bernado v. Collector of Customs
[AIR 1960 Ker 170],
           to urge that importation was complete so soon as the
           customs barrier was crossed. They are cases under the
Customs Act
and it is needless for us to seek aid from there
           when there is enough direct light under the
Copyright Act
and the various conventions and treaties which have with
           the subject “copyright” from different angles. We do not also
           desire to crow our judgment with reference to the history of
           the copyright and the customs legislations in the United
           Kingdom and India as we do not think it necessary to do so
           in this case.”2
35. A recent judgment of this Court in
State of Kerala & Ors. v. Fr.

   William Fernandez Etc
. 2017 SCC OnLine SC 1291, was concerned

   with the validity of various State legislations relating to entry tax. As

   many as eight issues were raised by this Court, in which issue (iv)

   reads as follows:
2   Page 691.
49
“44(iv). Whether the importation of goods, imported from a
         territory outside the India continues till the goods reach in
         the premises/factory of the importer, during which period
         State at no point of time is legislative competence to impose
         any tax.”
36. The discussion in answering this question raised in paragraph 44(iv)

   begins in paragraph 86. After referring to various definitions of the term

   “import” in different legal situations, this Court noticed various

   judgments relating to customs in paragraphs 97 to 103. As a matter of

   fact in paragraph 103, the law
laid down in
Garden Silk Mills Ltd.
(supra) was extracted with approval as follows:
103. Similar view was expressed in the case of
Garden Silk
         Mills Ltd. v. Union of India
, (1999) 8 SCC 744, in paragraph
         18, which is to the following effect:—

         “18. It would appear to us that the import of goods into India
         would commence when the same cross into the territorial
         waters but continues and is completed when the goods
         become part of the mass of goods within the country; the
         taxable event being reached at the time when the goods
         reach the customs barriers and the bill of entry for home
         consumption is filed.”
37. These judgments were then distinguished by the Court as follows:
“104. The law relating to customs has been consolidated by
         the
Customs Act, 1962
. The definitions of “import”, “imported
         goods” and “importer” have already been noticed above.
         The definition of imported goods as given in
Section 2(25)
is-any goods brought into India from the place outside
         India but does not include goods, which have been cleared
         for home consumption. The provision clearly contemplates
         that once the goods are released for home consumption, the
         character of imported goods is lost and thereafter no longer
         the goods could be called as imported goods. The import
         transit is only till the goods are released for home
50
consumption. The taxing event for entry tax under Entry 52
        List II is entirely different and has nothing to do with the
        customs duty. The State by imposing entry tax in any
        manner is not entrenching in the power of the Parliament to
        impose customs duty. The goods are released for home
        consumption only after payment of the customs duty due to
        the Central Government. The goods which are imported
        cannot be held to be insulated so as to not subject to any
        State tax, any such insulation of the imported goods shall be
        a protectionist measure which will be discriminatory and
        invalid. When all normal goods are subjected to State tax no
        exemption can be claimed by goods, which have been
        imported from payment of entry tax. To take a common
        example, all goods, which pass through a toll bridge are
        liable to pay toll tax, can it be said that the imported goods
        which after having been released from customs barriers and
        are passing through a toll bridge, are not liable to pay the toll
        tax, the answer has to be in No. Thus, the event for levy of
        customs duty, which is in the domain of the Parliament, is
        entirely different from that of event of entry tax. The liability
        to pay State entry tax arises only when goods enter into a
        local area for consumption, use and sale, which event is
        entirely different and separate from the levy of a customs
        duty, which is on import.”
                                                  (emphasis in original)
38. The judgment went on to discuss the “original package” doctrine of

   Chief Justice Marshall in paragraphs 108 to 120, finding that recent US

   Supreme Court judgments had abandoned this doctrine, and that

   therefore, the Federal Court in
Boddu Paidanna
(supra) and the two

   judgments of this Court in
F.N. Balsara
(supra) and
Gramophone

   Company of India Ltd.
(supra) were correct in not relying on this

   doctrine in the context of the cases before them. This doctrine has no

   place in the customs law of India, the judgments of this Court
51
concentrating on when an import can be said to be complete on an

   analysis of the
Customs Act
.
39. Given the aforesaid judgments under the
Customs Act
, a container,

   being a receptacle in which goods are imported, cannot be said to be

   “goods” that are imported as it does not become part of the mass of

   goods within the country on the facts of these cases. Thus, once

   destuffing takes place, the container has to be returned either to the

   ship-owner’s agent, or to the person who owns such container.
40. In fact, the Bill of Entry (Forms) Regulations, 1976 (as amended up to

   date) contain forms in which a Bill of Entry is to be presented by an

   importer of goods for home consumption, or for warehousing, or for ex-

   bond clearance for home consumption.
Regulation 3
of the aforesaid

   Regulations reads as follows:
“3. Form of Bill of Entry.- The Bill of Entry to be presented
         by an importer of any goods for home consumption or for
         warehousing or for ex-bond clearance for home
         consumption shall be in Form I or Form II or Form III as the
         case may be.
Explanation - In this regulation, "goods" does not include
         those goods which are intended for transit or
         transshipment.”
41. Form I, which speaks of a Bill of Entry for home consumption, contains

   a declaration to be signed by an importer, clause 6(b) of which is

   important and is set out hereunder:
52
“6(b) I/We declare that there are the following payments
         actually paid or payable for the imported goods by way of
         cost and services other than those declared in the invoice^
         [^please refer to Rule 10 (1) (a) & (b) of the Customs
         Valuation Rules, 2007]

          Sl.                 Particulars               Amount or
          No.                                       expressed as % of
                                                      the unit price

            i.          Brokerage           and
                        Commissions, except
                        buying    commission
                        [Rule 10(1)(a)(i) of the
                        Customs      Valuation
                        Rules, 2007]:
ii.          Cost of containers
                        [Rule 10(1)(a)(ii)]:

           iii.         Packing cost        [Rule
                        10(1)(a)(iii)]:

          iv.           Cost of goods and
                        services supplied by
                        the    buyer    [Rule
                        10(1)(b)]:

                                                                        ”
42. The same declaration is contained in Forms II and III. A perusal of the

   aforesaid Forms prescribed under the said Regulations would show

   the difference between “goods” that are imported, which have

   reference to the bill of lading/invoice presented by the importer which

   contains the number and value of the goods imported, and payments

   by way of costs and services other than those declared in the invoice,

   which includes costs of containers under Rule 10(1)(a)(ii) of the
53
Customs Valuation (Determination of Value of Imported Goods) Rules,

   2007, and packing costs under Rule 10(1)(a)(iii) of these Rules. This

   leads to an examination of the aforesaid Rules.
43. Rules 2(1)(d) and (f) of these Rules are relevant, and are set out

   hereinbelow:
“2. Definitions.-
(1) In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires,-
xxx xxx xxx
(d) “identical goods” means imported goods-
(i) which are same in all respects, including physical
           characteristics, quality and reputation as the goods being
           valued except for minor differences in appearance that do
           not affect the value of the goods;
(ii) produced in the country in which the goods being
           valued were produced; and
(iii) produced by the same person who produced the
           goods, or where no such goods are available, goods
           produced by a different person, but shall not include
           imported goods where engineering, development work,
           art work, design work, plan or sketch undertaken in India
           were completed directly or indirectly by the buyer on
           these imported goods free of charge or at a reduced cost
           for use in connection with the production and sale for
           export of these imported goods;
xxx xxx xxx
(f) “similar goods” means imported goods –
(i) which although not alike in all respects, have like
           characteristics and like component materials which
           enable them to perform the same functions and to be
           commercially interchangeable with the goods being
54
valued having regard to the quality, reputation and the
            existence of trade mark;
(ii) produced in the country in which the goods being
            valued were produced; and
(iii) produced by the same person who produced the
            goods being valued, or where no such goods are
            available, goods produced by a different person, but shall
            not include imported goods where engineering,
            development work, art work, design work, plan or sketch
            undertaken in India were completed directly or indirectly
            by the buyer on these imported goods free of charge or
            at a reduced cost for use in connection with the
            production and sale for export of these imported goods;”
44. Rule 4 deals with the transaction value of “identical goods”, and Rule

   5 deals with the transaction value of “similar goods”, and are set out

   hereinbelow:
“4. Transaction value of identical goods.–

            (1)(a) Subject to the provisions of rule 3, the value of
            imported goods shall be the transaction value of identical
            goods sold for export to India and imported at or about
            the same time as the goods being valued;
Provided that such transaction value shall not be the
            value of the goods provisionally assessed under
section
            18
of the Customs Act, 1962.
(b) In applying this rule, the transaction value of identical
            goods in a sale at the same commercial level and in
            substantially the same quantity as the goods being
            valued shall be used to determine the value of imported
            goods.
(c) Where no sale referred to in clause (b) of sub-rule (1),
            is found, the transaction value of identical goods sold at
            a different commercial level or in different quantities or
            both, adjusted to take account of the difference
55
attributable to commercial level or to the quantity or both,
            shall be used, provided that such adjustments shall be
            made on the basis of demonstrated evidence which
            clearly establishes the reasonableness and accuracy of
            the adjustments, whether such adjustment leads to an
            increase or decrease in the value.
(2) Where the costs and charges referred to in sub-rule
            (2) of rule 10 of these rules are included in the transaction
            value of identical goods, an adjustment shall be made, if
            there are significant differences in such costs and
            charges between the goods being valued and the
            identical goods in question arising from differences in
            distances and means of transport.
(3) In applying this rule, if more than one transaction
            value of identical goods is found, the lowest such value
            shall be used to determine the value of imported goods.
5. Transaction value of similar goods.-
(1) Subject to the provisions of rule 3, the value of
            imported goods shall be the transaction value of similar
            goods sold for export to India and imported at or about
            the same time as the goods being valued:
Provided that such transaction value shall not be the
            value of the goods provisionally assessed under
section
            18
of the Customs Act, 1962.
(2) The provisions of clauses (b) and (c) of sub-rule (1),
            sub-rule (2) and sub-rule (3), of rule 4 shall, mutatis
            mutandis, also apply in respect of similar goods.”
45. A perusal of these Rules would show that the value of imported goods

   shall be the transaction value of identical goods, as defined, or similar

   goods, as defined – whichever rule applies to the facts of each

   particular case. It is clear that whether identical goods or similar goods

   are taken into account, the price of the container never enters, as the
56
only “goods” that are to be looked at are the goods that are “imported”,

   i.e. goods that are stuffed in the containers. Likewise, when it comes

   to “computed value”, Rule 8 states as follows:
“8. Computed value.- Subject to the provisions of rule 3,
            the value of imported goods shall be based on a
            computed value, which shall consist of the sum of:-
(a) the cost or value of materials and fabrication or other
            processing employed in producing the imported goods;
(b) an amount for profit and general expenses equal to
            that usually reflected in sales of goods of the same class
            or kind as the goods being valued which are made by
            producers in the country of exportation for export to India;
(c) the cost or value of all other expenses under sub-rule
            (2) of rule 10.”
46. Rule 10, which deals with “costs and services” then states:
“10. Costs and services.-
(1) In determining the transaction value, there shall be
            added to the price actually paid or payable for the
            imported goods, -
(a) the following to the extent they are incurred by the
            buyer but are not included in the price actually paid or
            payable for the imported goods, namely:-
xxx xxx xxx
(ii) the cost of containers which are treated as being one
            for customs purposes with the goods in question;”
47. A reading of Rule 10(1)(a)(ii) would lead to the same result, as

   “imported goods” are differentiated from “containers”. Further, for the

   purposes of customs valuation, addition to the transaction value of the
57
imported goods is made only when the cost of containers is treated as

   being one with the goods in question. Even in such a situation, what is

   then imported is the “goods” and the container – the container not

   having to be destuffed, and therefore being cleared along with the

   goods contained therein for home consumption. In such a case, where

   containers do not have to be returned, but are imported along with the

   goods contained within it, after the Board takes custody of such

   container and the goods within it, the vessel or steamer agent is no

   longer liable – even containers that do not need to be destuffed will

   then incur demurrage along with the goods contained within it, which

   are then payable by the importer, owner, consignor or agent thereof.
48. Further, to make matters clear beyond doubt, General Exemption No.

   170, which speaks of ‘Exemption to containers of durable nature’ 3 ,

   states as follows:
“In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of
Section 25
of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), the
            Central Government, being satisfied that it is necessary
            in the public interest so to do, hereby exempts containers
            which are of durable nature, falling within the
First
            Schedule to the Customs Tariff Act, 1975
(51 of 1975),
            when imported into India, from, -
(a) the whole of the duty of customs leviable thereon
            under the said First Schedule; and



   3Notification No. 104/94 dated 16.03.1994 as amended by Notification No. 101/95
   and 43/17.
58
(b) the whole of the integrated tax leviable thereon under
           sub-section (7) of
section 3
of the said
Customs Tariff Act
:
Provided that the importer, by execution of a bond in such
           form and for such sum as may be specified by the
           Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Dy.
Commissioner of Customs binds himself to re-export the
           said containers within six months from the date of their
           importation and to furnish documentary evidence thereof
           of the satisfaction of the said Assistant Commissioner
           and to pay the duty leviable thereon in the event of the
           importer's failure to do so:
Provided further that in any particular case, the aforesaid
           period of six months may, on sufficient cause being
           shown, be extended by the said Assistant Commissioner
           for such further period, as he may deem fit.”

A clarification by the Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs dated

25th October, 20024, clarified as to what is meant by “containers of durable

nature” as follows:
“Notification No.104/94-Cus., exempts containers which
           are of durable nature from the whole of the duty of
           customs and additional duty subject to the condition that
           such containers are re-exported within 6 months from the
           date of importation and documentary evidence is
           furnished to the satisfaction of the Assistant
           Commissioner. As per the meanings assigned to the
           words “durable” and “container” in various Dictionaries, it
           would appear that any goods (containers) used for
           packaging or transporting other goods, and capable of
           being used several times, would fall in the category of
           “containers of durable nature”.
A reading of the aforesaid also goes to buttress the conclusion reached

in the previous paragraph of this judgment.
4   Circular No.69/2002-Customs.
59
49.
The Customs Tariff Act, 1975
also throws considerable light on

   containers fit for repetitive use.
Section 2
of the said Act states as

   follows:
“2. Duties specified in the Schedules to be levied.—
              The rates at which duties of customs shall be levied under
              the
Customs Act, 1962
(52 of 1962), are specified in the
              First and Second Schedules.”
50. The First Schedule deals with general rules for interpretation of “this

   Schedule”, and states:
“5. In addition to the foregoing provisions, the following
              rules shall apply in respect of the goods referred to
              therein:
(a) camera cases, musical instrument cases, gun cases,
              drawing instrument cases, necklace cases and similar
              containers, specially shaped or fitted to contain a specific
              article or set of articles, suitable for long-term use and
              presented with the articles for which they are intended,
              shall be classified with such articles when of a kind
              normally sold therewith. This rule does not, however,
              apply to containers which give the whole its essential
              character;
(b)subject to the provisions of (a) above, packing
              materials and packing containers presented with the
              goods therein shall be classified with the goods if they are
              of a kind normally used for packing such goods. However,
              this provision does not apply when such packing
              materials or packing containers are clearly suitable for
              repetitive use.”
51. This paragraph again clearly differentiates between containers which

   go along with the goods contained therein “suitable for long-term use”,

   from containers “suitable for repetitive use”, thus making it clear that
60
the containers of the latter type cannot be classified with the goods

   contained therein for payment of customs duty.
52. At this juncture, it is important to examine the judgments of this Court.
In
Rowther-I
(supra), the question before five honourable Judges of

   this Court arose out of the enforcement of the Scale ‘E’ rate that was

   added to the Madras Port Trust Scale of Rates in 1958. The question

   arose under the pari materia provisions of the Madras Port Trust Act,

   1905 (“Madras Act”), which has since been repealed by the MPT Act

   by
section 133(2C)
thereof. The respondents in this case were steamer

   agents. Scale ‘E’ laid down charges to be paid by Masters, Owners or

   Agents of vessels in respect of Port Trust labour requisitioned and

   supplied, but not fully or properly utilised, for unloading goods from the

   vessel. These rates are set out at pages 923 and 924 of the Supreme

   Court Report, and indicate that a certain amount has to be paid to

   labour which is rendered idle either on account of the vessel’s fault, or

   on account of force majeure conditions such as rain. This is further

   fleshed out by a Circular dated 25.02.1958, referred to at pages 925

   and 926. After setting out the relevant sections of the Madras Act, the

   by-laws, and the Manual of Instructions framed and issued by the

   Board, the first proposition of law
laid down in
the said judgment
is that

   it is not obligatory on behalf of the Board to undertake the various
61
services mentioned in section 39 of the Madras Act (which is pari

   materia with section 42 of the MPT Act). It is only if such services are

   required by the “owner” as defined that such services are undertaken

   by the Board. It was then held that it was the steamer agent who was

   in a position to require the Board to undertake such services in respect

   of the cargo that the ship is to unload (see pages 935 to 936). The

   question for determination was then set out as follows:
“The question for determination, in the case, then is whether
           the law making the steamer-agent liable to pay these
           charges is good law.”5
53. “These charges”, as has been stated earlier, were on account of

   payment of labour dues for labour remaining idle, such labour being of

   the Port Trust which was used in the unloading of goods from the

   vessel. It was then mentioned that these charges were for the benefit

   of the vessel so that it completes its task of landing the goods as soon

   as possible. It was also pointed out that the steamer agent, and not the

   consignee, was liable to pay these charges as the goods are not

   unloaded “consignee-wise” (see page 938-939). It was then laid down

   that the ship-owner is the bailee of the consignor, and that he is

   responsible for delivery of goods to the consignee or transferee

   according to the terms of the bill of lading. However, the Court held that



   5   Page 937.
62
delivery of goods by the ship-owner to the Board cannot be said to be

delivery to the consignee, as the Board cannot be said to be an agent

of the consignee for the purpose of taking delivery of goods (see page
939). Also, the Court observed that the provision of lien which the

Board can exercise on the goods for non-payment of dues of the Board

makes it clear that it does not act as an agent of the consignee (see

page 947). The Court also held that when section 39(3) of the Madras

Act speaks of taking of charge of the goods by the Board and giving a

receipt to a ship-owner, and the master or owner of the vessel being

absolved from liability for any loss or damage which may occur to the

goods which had been landed, also does not lead to the conclusion

that the Board takes delivery of those goods on behalf of the

consignee. The Court then held:
“It is clear therefore that when the Board takes charge of the
        goods from the ship-owner, the ship-owner is the bailor and
        the Board is the bailee, and the Board’s responsibility for the
        goods thereafter is that of a bailee. The Board does not get
        the goods from the consignee. It cannot be the bailee of the
        consignee. It can be the agent of the consignee only if so
        appointed, which is not alleged to be the case, and even if
        the Board be an agent, then its liability would be as an agent
        and not as a bailee. The provisions of
ss.39
and
40
,
        therefore, further support the contention that the Board takes
        charge of the goods on behalf of the ship-owner and not on
        behalf of the consignee, and whatever services it performs
        at the time of the landing of the goods or on their removal
        thereafter, are services rendered to the ship.”6
6   Page 940.
63
54. This passage clearly states that since the Board does not get the

   goods directly from the consignee, but only from the ship-owners, it

   cannot possibly be said to be the bailee of the consignee. The

   observation that whatever services the Board performs at the time of

   landing of the goods, or “on their removal thereafter” are services

   rendered to the ship, must be understood in the context of the facts of

   that case. A perusal of the Board’s counter affidavit, which is reflected

   at page no.921, would show that the Harbour dues on the import of

   cargo speaks, inter alia, of charges involved in moving the goods from

   the landing point to the storage point. The expression “on their removal

   thereafter”, on the facts of this case, would therefore only mean

   services performed by the Board from landing point to storage point,

   and not thereafter. This is in fact made even clearer by the following

   passage in
the said judgment
:
“The charges for labour rendered idle and for labour working
           more hooks simultaneously, are not charges for services
           rendered subsequent to the landing of the goods. These are
           charges which are incurred at the last stage of the process
           of landing of the goods and therefore prior to the actual
           landing of the goods. They are, even under the general law,
           for services rendered to the master of the ship whose liability
           for loss or of damage to the goods continues up to the
           placing of the goods on the quay and their receipt by the
           Board.”7




   7   Page 942.
64
55. While dealing with the case of Peterson v. Freebody & Co. [1895] 2

   Q.B.D. 294, which related to a suit between the ship-owner and the

   consignee, the observations of Lord Esher that the ship-owner must

   do something more than merely put his goods over the rail of his ship,

   namely, that he must put the goods in such position that the consignee

   can take delivery of them, were limited only to goods which are to be

   delivered to the consignee alongside the ship, and not when they are

   handed over to a statutory body like the Board, as a sub-bailee. The

   delivery therefore contemplated by these observations was held to be

   not equivalent to landing of the goods at the quay and placing them in

   charge of the Board. The observations as to the Board being a sub-

   bailee were therefore made to counter an argument based on an

   English judgment, that delivery of the goods to the Board amounts to

   delivery to the consignee, which would therefore make the consignee

   liable to pay the aforesaid unloading charges.
56. The second judgment with which we are concerned is
Rowther-II
(supra). The question that arose before a three-Judge Bench of this

   Court was whether demurrage charges payable to the Port Trust of

   Madras were to be recovered from the consignee of the goods, or from

   the steamer agent. The judgment of this Court, in essence, extracted
65
the judgment of the High Court that was impugned therein, and then

agreed with the same. The High Court had held:
“It cannot be disputed that neither the shipowner or the
     steamer agent whose duty it is to deliver the cargo to the
     consignee as per the contract with the shipper, cannot lay
     any claim of ownership to the goods. The obligation to
     deliver the goods to the consignee has been taken over by
     the Port Trust under the provisions of the statute and the
     shipowner is relieved of the liability for loss or damage to the
     goods from the moment the goods are taken charge of by
     the Port Trust as per
Section 39
of the Act. Once the goods
     are handed over to the Port Trust by the steamer and the
     steamer agents have duly endorsed the bill of lading or
     issued the delivery order, their obligation to deliver the
     goods personally to the owner or the endorsee comes to an
     end. The subsequent detention of the goods by the Port
     Trust as a result of the intervention by the Customs
     authorities cannot be said to be on behalf of or for the benefit
     of the steamer agents. Generally, if there is a delay in taking
     delivery of the goods by the consignee within a reasonable
     time, the steamer or its agent can warehouse the goods. In
     such an event the warehouseman has an independent claim
     against the consignee or endorsee for the demurrage
     charges. The position cannot be different merely because
     the Customs authorities have intervened. The position of the
     Port Trust is the same as that of a warehouseman whose
     responsibility to the goods is also said to be a bailee. It
     cannot be said that the steamer or its agents have
     undertaken any responsibility for the custody of the goods
     after the transit has come to an end and after the bill of lading
     has been duly endorsed or a delivery order issued. By the
     endorsement of the bill of lading or the issue of a delivery
     order by the steamer agents, the property in the goods vests
     on such consignee or endorsee, and thus it appears to be
     clear that the steamer or the steamer agents are not
     responsible for the custody of the goods after the property in
     the goods passes to the consignee or endorsee till the
     Customs authorities actually give a clearance. It should also
     be remembered that the steamer which had entered into a
     contract of carriage of goods for a reward cannot be said to
66
have undertaken the responsibility of safeguarding the
           goods or keeping them at their risk till the goods are actually
           cleared from the Customs and taken delivery of by the
           consignee. That will be imposing a too onerous and
           unexpected responsibility on the steamer which is only a
           carrier. If they are submitted to such a responsibility, in most
           cases where the goods are detained without delivery in the
           hands of the Port Trust at the instance of the Customs the
           steamer or steamer agents have to pay towards a storage
           or demurrage charges amounts quite disproportionate to the
           freight they collect for the carriage of the goods. No carrier
           will undertake such a risk and responsibility. We are of the
           view that the provisions of the
Port Trust Act
cannot be so
           construed as imposing an additional liability or obligation on
           the carrier which was not contemplated by the contract it had
           entered with the shipper. It is only the customs of or the
           statutory provisions applicable to the port of discharge that
           can be taken to be an implied condition of the contract
           between the shipper and the shipowner. Therefore, the
           provisions of the
Port Trust Act
cannot add to the liability of
           the steamer or its agents which was not contemplated by the
           shipper or the shipowner at the time of entering into the
           contract. Having regard to the functions and the obligations
           which a steamer has undertaken with the shipper under the
           contract, we cannot say that the steamer has undertaken the
           responsibility for the safety of the goods till the goods are
           cleared by the Customs and taken delivery of by the
           consignee. As earlier referred to, the duty of the steamer is
           normally to deliver the goods to the consignee on the quay
           side but that place of delivery has been shifted by the
           provisions of the
Port Trust Act
to the warehouse where the
           Port Trust had stored the goods.”8
57. The High Court then distinguished
Rowther-I
(supra) as follows:
“But as already stated, the charges
in that case
related to
           the services rendered by the Port Trust at the time of the
           landing of the goods and their removal thereafter to its
           custody, and those charges were taken to be for the benefit
           of the steamer. It is for this reason that the Court took the
           view that the Port Trust is entitled to collect the service

   8   Page 286-287.
67
charges from the steamer or its agent. We are, however,
           satisfied that
the above decision
cannot be taken to lay down
           that the Port Trust can at no time proceed against the
           consignee for demurrage charges and can only look to the
           steamer agent. We are, here, concerned with the demurrage
           charges after the goods have been landed and taken charge
           of by the Board and after the steamer agent had endorsed
           the bill of lading or issued a delivery order for effecting
           delivery to the consignee that is after the property in the
           goods had passed to him. As already stated, the goods have
           remained in the custody of the Port Trust on the default of
           the consignee to satisfy the Customs authorities that the
           import was authorised. “Even though the consignee is not a
           party to the contract of carriage once the property in the
           goods had passed to him, he becomes liable to pay the
           storage or demurrage charges as owner of the goods to the
           shipowner.”9
58.
Rowther-II
(supra) has made it clear that
Rowther-I
(supra) concerned

   itself with Port Trust dues at the time of landing of the goods, and their

   removal thereafter to custody of the Port Trust. These were charges

   wholly distinct from demurrage charges, which are incurred only after

   the goods have been landed and have been taken charge of by the

   Board. To the extent that the High Court lays this down as a proposition

   of law, there can be no exception. However, it goes on to state that

   when the steamer agent endorses the bill of lading or issues a delivery

   order for effecting delivery to the consignee, it is at this stage that the

   property in the goods passes to the consignee.
This part of
Rowther-

   II
(supra) is clearly contrary to
Rowther-I
(supra), which had stated:
9   Page 287.
68
“In the present case, it was further contended that as
           between the master of the ship and the consignee, the Act
           made it obligatory that the consignee gets his goods from
           the Board and not direct from the master of the ship, and
           that therefore the Board acts as the agent of the consignee.
           We have not been referred to any provision in the Act which
           supports this contention. Assuming, however, that the
           consignee cannot take delivery of the goods at the quay from
           the ship direct, it does not follow that the Board receives the
           goods as the agent of the consignee. The only reasonable
           conclusion in the circumstances can be that the place of
           delivery is shifted from the side of the ship to the warehouses
           where the Board stores the goods till the consignee appears
           to take delivery on the basis of the delivery order by the
           steamer agent which is usually an endorsement on the bill
           of lading, and the quay be considered a part of the ship.”10
59.
Rowther-I
(supra) clearly lays down that the endorsement of the bill of

   lading by a steamer agent is for the purpose of delivery of the goods,

   and, accordingly, cannot be for the transfer of title to the goods.
Rowther-II
(supra) cannot, therefore, be said to be good in law when

   it speaks of endorsement on the bill of lading and issuance of delivery

   order by the steamer agent passing title of the goods to the consignee.
Once this is made clear, the ratio of
Rowther-II
(supra) is to be

   understood thus: since charges for storage or demurrage are after

   goods are removed and placed in the custody of the Board, the

   steamer agent cannot be made to pay the same, as it would impose “a

   too onerous and unexpected responsibility on the steamer”, which is

   only a carrier, and not owner, of the goods.
10   Page 946.
69
60. At this juncture, it is important to understand the legal effect of a bill of

   lading. This has been set out by a five Judge Bench of this Court in
J.V. Gokal and Co. (Pvt.) Ltd. v. Asst
. Collector of Sales-Tax

   (Inspection) and Ors. (1960) 2 SCR 852, as follows:
“A bill of lading is “a writing, signed on behalf of the owner of
          the ship in which goods are embarked, acknowledging the
          receipt of the goods, and undertaking to deliver them at the
          end of the voyage subject to such conditions as may be
          mentioned in the bill of lading”. It is well-settled in
          commercial world that a bill of lading represents the goods
          and the transfer of it operates as a transfer of the goods. The
          legal effect of the transfer of a bill of lading has been
          enunciated by Bowen, L.J., in Sanders Brothers v. Maclean
          & Co. [(1883) II QBD 327] thus at p. 341:
“The law as to the indorsement of bills of lading is as clear
          as in my opinion the practice of all European merchants is
          thoroughly understood. A cargo at sea while in the hands of
          the carrier is necessarily incapable of physical delivery.
          During this period of transit and voyage, the bill of lading by
          the law merchant is universally recognised as its symbol,
          and the indorsement and delivery of the bill of lading
          operates as a symbolical delivery of cargo. Property in the
          goods passes by such indorsement and delivery of the bill
          of lading, whenever it is the intention of the parties that the
          property should pass just as under similar circumstances the
          property would pass by an actual delivery of the goods. And
          for the purpose of passing such property in the goods and
          completing the title of the indorsee to full possession thereof,
          the bill of lading, until complete delivery of the cargo has
          been made on shore to someone rightfully claiming under it,
          remains in force as a symbol, and carries with it not only the
          full ownership of the goods, but also all rights created by the
          contract of carriage between the shipper and the shipowner.
          It is a key which in the hands of a rightful owner is intended
70
to unlock the door of the warehouse, floating or fixed, in
           which the goods may chance to be.”11
61.
Section 1
of the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856 is also important, which

   states:
“Rights under bills of lading to vest in consignee or
           endorsee.—Every consignee of goods named in a bill of
           lading, and every endorsee of a bill of lading to whom the
           property in the goods therein mentioned shall pass, upon or
           by reason of such consignment or endorsement shall have
           transferred to and vested in him all rights of suit, and be
           subject to the same liabilities in respect of such goods as if
           the contract contained in the bill of lading had been made
           with himself.”
62. Under this section, the “endorsement” referred to is the endorsement

   made by the consignor or owner of the goods in favour of such

   endorsee on the bill of lading, so that title to property is then transferred

   to the endorsee. This endorsement is very far removed, as has been

   correctly stated in
Rowther-I
(supra), from the endorsement on the bill

   of lading by a steamer agent indicating that the goods have been

   delivered.
Therefore, shorn of the confusion that has arisen as a result

   of mixing-up the two types of endorsement, the ratio of
Rowther-II
(supra) that, after goods are taken charge of by the Port Trust and

   stored in its premises incurring demurrage charges thereon, the vessel

   or its agent cannot be made responsible, is unexceptionable.




   11   Page 861-862.
71
63. After extracting passages of the judgment of the High Court, this Court

   in
Rowther-II
(supra) then went on to extract a passage from
International    Airport   Authority    of   India   v.   Grand     Slam

   International
(1995) 3 SCC 151, by which it was made clear that

   demurrage charges are to be paid by the importer or consignee liable

   for the same (and not the vessel or the steamer agent thereof).
64.
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra) is the next judgment that has to be dealt

   with in chronological sequence. This was a judgment of two learned

   judges of this Court, in which the question that arose before the Court

   was stated thus:
“1. The common question involved in these appeals is
         whether the appellant Board of Trustees of the Port Trust
         constituted under the
Major Port Trusts Act, 1963
(for short
         “the MPT Act”) have a general lien for their dues over the
         present or future consignments imported by the importers at
         the Bombay Port when the said dues are in respect of the
         past imports made by the said importers.”
65. The Court first found that a reading of sections 59 and 61(1) of the

   MPT Act made it clear that the lien spoken of is a lien qua the particular

   goods that are imported, and cannot extend to previous imports of

   similar goods made by the same party. The Court then went on to hold

   that the MPT Act is not a comprehensive code, and has to be read

   together with other Acts wherever the MPT Act is silent. It was then

   held that
section 171
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 speaks of a

   general lien which may be exercised by the Port Trust as it is a
72
“wharfinger” within the meaning of said section. This being so, the Port

   Trust may continue to retain the goods bailed as security for past dues,

   but would have to have recourse to proceedings in accordance with

   law for securing an order, which would then enable the Port Trust to

   sell the goods to realise the amounts due to it. This could be done by

   filing a suit for recovery of the amount due to it under section 131 of

   the MPT Act.
66. However, the judgment goes on to make certain observations, in

   particular in paragraph 23, stating that a relationship of bailor and

   bailee comes into existence, when the Board is required to store goods

   that have been imported, between the Board and the consignee of

   those goods. Apart from the fact that this is directly contrary to

   Rowther-I (see page 940), the consignee cannot be considered to be

   a bailor if the definition of bailor under the
Indian Contract Act, 1872
is

   read. Under
section 148
of the Contract Act, a bailor is defined as a

   person who delivers the goods to the bailee.
In this case, the person

   who delivers the goods to the bailee is the vessel and not the

   consignee, as has been correctly stated in
Rowther-I
(supra).
Therefore, the observations that the consignee is the bailor of the

   goods, with the Port Trust being the bailee thereof, made in paragraphs

   23 and 25 of
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra) cannot be said to state the
73
law correctly, and are accordingly overruled. However, since we are

   not going into the point of sub-bailment as argued by Shri Pratap, we

   leave open the question as to whether the Port Trust, as sub-bailee, is

   entitled to recover its dues from the original bailor – the consignor, and

   persons claiming through it, given the statutory scheme of the MPT

   Act.
67.
However, Rowther-I
(supra) was correctly distinguished by the Court

   in
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra) in paragraph 24 thereof, and its ratio

   qua the MPT Act not being an exhaustive code has our concurrence.
68.
In
Forbes-I
(supra), two learned Judges of this Court doubted the

   correctness of
Rowther-II
(supra) and framed three questions

   (referred to earlier in this judgment) to be answered by a larger Bench.

   On 13.08.2014, the larger Bench of three Judges held:
“We have gone through the order whereby the matter has
          been referred to this Bench. We have noted the fact that no
          reason for not agreeing with the Judgment delivered by a
          three-Judge Bench has been assigned in the said order.
          Moreover, upon going through the Judgment delivered in
          1997 (10) SCC 285, we see no reason to disagree with the
ratio
laid down in
the said Judgment. In these
          circumstances, we refer the matter back to the regular bench
          for further hearing as we do not see any inconsistency in the
          said Judgment.”
69. The matter then came back to a Bench of two Hon’ble Judges of this

   Court, which delivered the judgment in
Forbes-II
(supra). In Forbes-II,

   the Court set out the question of law that arose before it as follows:
74
“1…The common question of law that arises in these
        appeals, though in different facts and circumstances, is with
        regard to the liability of the agent of a shipowner (hereinafter
        referred to as the “steamer agent”) to pay demurrage and
        port charges to the Board of Trustees of a Port (hereinafter
        referred to as “the Port Trust Authority”) in respect of goods
        brought into the port and warehoused by the said authority.
        Before proceeding to answer the aforesaid question it will be
        convenient to take note of the core facts in each of the
        appeals under consideration.”
70. Agreeing with the High Courts of Bombay and Calcutta that the

   steamer agent cannot be made liable for demurrage, the Court went

   on to hold:
“10. While it is correct that the liability to pay demurrage
        charges and port rent is statutory, in the absence of any
        specific bar under the statute, such liability can reasonably
        fall on a steamer agent if on a construction of the provisions
        of the Act such a conclusion can be reached. Determination
        of the aforesaid question really does not hinge on the
        meaning of the expression “owner” as appearing in
Section
        2(o)
of the 1963 Act, as has been sought to be urged on
        behalf of the appellant though going by the language of
Section 2(o)
and the other provisions of the Act especially
Section 42
, an owner would include a shipowner or his
        agent. Otherwise it is difficult to reconcile how custody of the
        goods for the purpose of rendering services under
Section
        42
can be entrusted to the Port Trust Authority by the owner
        as provided therein under
Section 42(2)
. At that stage the
        goods may still be in the custody of the shipowner under a
        separate bailment with the shipper or the consignor, as may
        be. Even dehors the above question the liability to pay
        demurrage charges and port rent would accrue to the
        account of the steamer agent if a contract of bailment
        between the steamer agent and the Port Trust Authority can
        be held to come into existence under
Section 42(2)
read with
Section 43(1)(ii)
of the 1963 Act.
11. For the reasons already indicated the decision
        in Sriyanesh Knitters with regard to existence of a
75
relationship of bailor and bailee between the consignee and
the Port Trust Authority instead of the steamer agent and the
Port Trust Authority cannot be understood to be a
restatement of a general principle of law but a mere
conclusion reached in the facts of the case where the
consignee had already appeared in the scene. In all other
situations where the bill of lading has not been endorsed or
delivery orders have not been issued and therefore the
consignee is yet to surface, the following observations of the
Constitution Bench in K.P.V. Sheik Mohamed Rowther &
Co. [Port of Madras v. K.P.V. Sheik Mohamed Rowther &
Co., 1963 Supp (2) SCR 915] will have to prevail: (SCR p.
940)

“
Section 40
speaks of the responsibility of the Board for the
loss, destruction or deterioration of the goods of which it has
taken charge as a bailee under
Sections 151
,
152
and
161
of the Contract Act, 1872.
Section 148
of the Contract Act
states that a bailment is the delivery of goods by one person
to another for some purpose, upon a contract that they shall,
when the purpose is accomplished, be returned or otherwise
disposed of according to the directions of the person
delivering them. The person delivering the goods is called
the bailor and the person to whom they are delivered is
called the bailee. It is clear therefore that when the Board
takes charge of the goods from the shipowner, the
shipowner is the bailor and the Board is the bailee, and the
Board's responsibility for the goods thereafter is that of a
bailee. The Board does not get the goods from the
consignee. It cannot be the bailee of the consignee. It can
be the agent of the consignee only if so appointed, which is
not alleged to be the case, and even if the Board be an
agent, then its liability would be as an agent and not as a
bailee. The provisions of
Sections 39
and
40
, therefore,
further support the contention that the Board takes charge
of the goods on behalf of the shipowner and not on behalf of
the consignee, and whatever services it performs at the time
of the landing of the goods or on their removal thereafter,
are services rendered to the ship.”
12. From the above, the position of law which appears to
emerge is that once the bill of lading is endorsed or the
delivery order is issued it is the consignee or endorsee who
76
would be liable to pay the demurrage charges and other
         dues of the Port Trust Authority. In all other situations the
         contract of bailment is one between the steamer agent
         (bailor) and the Port Trust Authority (bailee) giving rise to the
         liability of the steamer agent for such charges till such time
         that the bill of lading is endorsed or delivery order is issued
         by the steamer agent.
13. In the orders of the Calcutta High Court under challenge,
         it is mentioned that
Section 60
of the Act provides a remedy
         to the steamer agent to recover the dues from the
         consignee.
Section 60
of the 1963 Act confers a limited lien
         on the shipowner “for freight and other charges payable to
         the shipowner” which expression does not extend to
         demurrage and other port charges. The High Court,
         therefore, does not appear to be correct in its conclusions.
         However, the said error would not be fundamental to the final
         conclusion reached by the High Court. In this regard we
         cannot help noticing the special provisions of
Sections 61
and
62
of the Act which enable the Port Trust Authority to
         proceed against the goods within its custody to recover the
         charges which may be payable to the Port Trust Authority.
         Ordinarily and in the normal course if resort is made to the
         enabling provisions in the 1963 Act to proceed against the
         goods for recovery of the charges payable to the Port Trust
         Authority there may not be any occasion for the said
         authority to sustain any loss or even suffer any shortfall of
         the dues payable to it so as to initiate recovery proceedings
         against the shipowners.”
71. Paragraph 10 of the judgment does hold that the language of
section

   2(o)
read with other provisions of the MPT Act, especially
section 42
,

   would include a ship-owner or his agent. We have already pointed out

   that the principle of noscitur a sociis cannot be applied to this definition

   clause, both on its plain language, as also the fact that it is an inclusive

   definition clause, which shows that this statement of the law is correct.

   However, the statement in this paragraph that even de hors the above
77
question, the liability to pay demurrage charges and port rent would

   accrue to the account of the steamer agent because of the statutory

   bailment that comes into existence under
section 42(2)
read with
section 43(1)(ii)
, is plainly incorrect, in view of our finding that after the

   Port Trust takes charge of the goods and issues a receipt therefor (at

   which point of time the statutory bailment comes into force), the vessel

   or the steamer agent cannot be held liable.
72.
Insofar as paragraph 11 is concerned, we have already made it clear

   that
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra) cannot be said to reflect the correct

   position in law, insofar as a bailment between the consignee and the

   Port Trust is concerned, and thus
Sriyanesh Knitters
(supra
)
has

   been overruled
by us to this extent.
73. Paragraph 12 of
the said judgment
contains the same confusion that

   is contained in
Rowther-II
(supra), and cannot therefore be said to lay

   down the law correctly. The correct position in law is, as has been

   stated hereinabove, that after the Port Trust takes charge of the goods,

   and issues a receipt therefor, and thereafter stores the goods in a place

   belonging to it, such storage charge cannot be to the account of the

   vessel or an agent of the vessel.
74. Paragraph 13 refers to one other aspect of the case that has been

   argued before us. It may be recalled that the impugned judgment of
78
the Kerala High Court in the present case had held that the word “may”

occurring in sections 61 and 62 of the MPT Act must be read as “shall”.

This is not the correct position in law, as a discretion is vested in the

Board to sell the goods in the circumstances mentioned in
sections 61
and
62
. However, such discretion cannot be exercised arbitrarily, as

the Board is “State” within the meaning of
Article 12
of the Constitution,

and is therefore bound by the constraints of
Article 14
of the

Constitution of India (see
Dwarkadas Marfatia and Sons v. Board of

Trustees of the Port of Bombay
(1989) 3 SCC 293 at paragraph 22).

Therefore while it may not be correct to say that “may” has to be read

as “shall” in sections 61 and 62 of the MPT Act, yet in all future cases

the Board is under a constitutional duty to sell the goods in its custody

within a reasonable time from which it takes custody of those goods.

Ordinarily, the time of four months from the date of landing of the goods

mentioned in section 63(1)(c) of the MPT Act should be the outer-limit

within which such goods should be put up for sale. If not put up for sale

within such time, the Board must explain as to why, in its opinion, this

could not be done, which explanation can then be tested by the Courts.

If the explanation is found to be reasonable, and the owner or person

entitled to the goods does not remove the goods thereafter, penal

demurrage may then be levied and collected by the Board. To this
79
extent, therefore, while overruling the impugned judgment of the Kerala

   High Court on the aspect of “may” being read as “shall” in sections 61

   and 62 of the MPT Act, yet the hovering omnipresence of
Article 14
over the Board must always be given effect to, and there must be a

   very good reason to continue detention of goods beyond the period of

   four months as mentioned hereinabove before they are sold.
75. We now come to a judgment of two honourable Judges of this Court in
Rasiklal
(supra). The question that arose in this case was as to

   whether the Appellant ‘Rasiklal Kantilal and Company’, who was a

   person interested in purchasing goods, and did not at the time have

   title to the goods, would be liable to pay demurrage charges for a

   period of roughly six months, which began with the date on which he

   applied to the customs authorities to have bills of entries substituted in

   his name. On the facts
in that case
, during the period from November,

   1991 to January, 1992, 78 shipments of goods were imported by 5

   different consignees from a UK company, one M/s Metal Distributors

   (UK) Ltd; these consignments were landed at Bombay Port. The

   consignees filed bills of entry for 37 out of 78 consignments, but

   subsequently failed to lift the consignments, as a result of which they

   came to be stored at the Port of Bombay. The consignments were

   shipped on a “CAD basis”, i.e. cash against documents, in which title
80
would remain with the UK company till such time that an importer would

   retire the documents against payment.
76. This Court held that despite Rasiklal not being an owner of the goods,

   he was liable to pay demurrage for the aforesaid period. Strictly

   speaking, this judgment does not apply to the facts of the cases before

   us, in that Rasiklal was neither the owner of a vessel or its agent. It

   was an importer of goods who had beneficial title to the said goods, as

   a formal agreement between the UK company and Rasiklal to

   purchase the said goods was made in April, 1992. Given our reading

   of the MPT Act, and
section 63(2)
in particular, this judgment could

   have been supported on the basis that Rasiklal was an importer (within

   the meaning of
section 63(2)
) of the goods, and as beneficial owner of

   the goods would therefore be liable to pay storage charges of the

   aforesaid goods. However, this Court did not choose this route in order

   to arrive at its conclusion. On the other hand, it went on to consider
Rowther-I
(supra),
Rowther-II
(supra), and
Forbes-II
(supra), and

   arrived at the following conclusion in paragraph 47:
“47. With respect, we agree with the conclusions recorded
         by this Court in Rowther-2 and Forbes that a Board could
         recover the rates due, either from the steamer agent or the
         consignee but we are of the humble opinion that enquiry into
         the question as to when the property in the goods passes to
         the consignee is not relevant.”
81
77. The Court then went on to examine various provisions with regard to

   bailment, and stated that passing of title in goods is irrelevant

   conceptually to bailment, which concerns itself with delivery and not

   title of goods. It then framed the question in paragraph 51, thus:
“The only question is: from whom can the board recover –
         we emphasise the question is not who is liable.”
78. From paragraphs 52 to 60, the Court then went on to consider the

   observations made in
Rowther-I
(supra) that the first respondent, i.e.

   the Port Trust, is a sub-bailee of the goods bailed by the consignor to

   the ship-owner. This being so, it is the consignor to whom the Port

   Trust has to look for payment of these charges, and since in this case

   Rasiklal is a consignee claiming through the consignor, Rasiklal would

   be liable.
Section 158
of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 and
section 1
of the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856 were relied upon to reach this

   conclusion.
79. First and foremost,
Rowther-I
(supra) did hold that the Port Trust is a

   sub-bailee of goods bailed by the consignor to the ship-owner, but so

   held in order to distinguish an English judgment – as has been pointed

   out hereinabove – which would then lead to the proposition that once

   the goods are placed in the charge of the Board, it would amount to

   delivery to the consignee, which proposition was turned down by the

   Court. The question whether
section 158
of the Contract Act can apply
82
to a statutory bailment under the MPT Act is left open, given that the

Port Trust is not limited only to recovering “necessary expenses” to be

payable by the bailor, but is statutorily is entitled to recover, by way of

levy of rates and expenses incurred for storage of the goods, together

with something more – the something more being rates of storage

higher than warehousing rates as a deterrent against keeping these

goods in the Port Trust premises.
This Court in
Board of Trustees of

the Port of Bombay v. Jai Hind Oil Mills Co. and Ors.
(1987) 1 SCC

648 has observed:
“10. The power of a Port Trust to fix rates of demurrage and
      to recover the same from an importer or exporter (although
      the question of an exporter paying demurrage arises rarely)
      under law and to show concession as regards demurrage
      charges in certain specified cases is recognised by this
      Court in the
Trustees of the Port of Madras v. Aminchand
      Pyarelal
[(1976) 3 SCC 167] and in the
Board of Trustees of
      the Port of Bombay v. Indian Goods Supplying Co.
[(1977) 2
      SCC 649]. These decisions are no doubt based on the
      relevant laws which were in force at the material time. But
      the decisions are still relevant insofar as cases arising under
      the Act because the Act also contains provisions more or
      less similar to the statutory provisions considered in the said
      decisions. Demurrage charges are levied in order to ensure
      quick clearance of the cargo from the harbour. They are
      always fixed in such a way that they would make it
      unprofitable for importers to use the port premises as a
      warehouse. It is necessary to do so because congestion in
      the ports affects the free movement of ships and the loading
      and unloading operations. As stated earlier, the Port Trust
      shows concession to the party concerned in certain types of
      cases.”
83
80. As a matter of fact, the Division Bench in
Rasiklal
(supra) seems to

   have put the cart before the horse, on a ground based in equity. The

   Court stated:
“60…Denying such a right on the ground that the person
         claiming delivery of the goods acquired title to the goods only
         towards the end of the period of the bailment of the goods
         with the first respondent would result in driving the first
         respondent to recover the amount due to it from the bailor or
         his agent who may or may not be within the jurisdiction of
         the municipal courts of this country (by resorting to a
         cumbersome procedure of litigation). The first submission is,
         therefore, rejected.”
81. As has been pointed out by us, no such right has been denied on a

   correct reading of the MPT Act. The importer, the consignee and the

   consignor, or their agents, can all be held liable to pay demurrage

   charges. However, since
Rasiklal
(supra) does not involve either the

   owner of the vessel or its agent, we leave open the question as to

   whether the Port Trust, as sub-bailee, is entitled to recover its dues

   from the original bailor – the consignor, and persons claiming through

   it, given the statutory scheme of the MPT Act, as has already been

   indicated in paragraph 66 above.
82. Based on the above discussion, our answers to the questions framed

   in the reference order are as follows:
1. The point of time at which title to the goods passes to the

      consignee is not relevant to determine the liability of the
84
consignee or steamer agent in respect of charges to be paid

to the Port Trust;
2. and 3. The bill of lading being endorsed by the steamer

agent is different from the bill of lading being endorsed by the

owner of the goods. In the first case, the endorsement leads to

delivery; in the second case, the endorsement leads to passing

of title. For the reasons mentioned in the judgment, both stages

are irrelevant in determining who is to pay storage charges –

we have held that upto the point that the Port Trust takes

charge of the goods, and gives receipt therefor, the steamer

agent may be held liable for Port Trust dues in connection with

services rendered qua unloading of goods, but that thereafter,

the importer, owner, consignee or their agent is liable to pay

demurrage charges for storage of goods;
4. As per paragraph 24 of our judgment;
5. The answer to question number 5 is really in two parts: first,

as to whether carrying goods in a container would make any

difference to the position that only the owner of the goods or

person entitled to the goods is liable to pay for demurrage; and

second, as to whether the Port Trust is obliged to destuff

containers that are entrusted to it and return empty containers
85
to the shipping agent. The answer to the first question is

contained in paragraphs 45 to 51 of our judgment. The answer

to the second question is that a container which has to be

returned is only a receptacle by which goods that are imported

into India are transported. Considering that the container may

belong either to the consignor, shipping agent, ship-owner, or

to some person who has leased out the same, it would be the

duty of the Port Trust to destuff every container that is

entrusted to it, and return destuffed containers to any such

person within as short a period as is feasible in cases where

the owner/person entitled to the goods does not come forward

to take delivery of the goods and destuff such containers. What

should be this period is to be determined on the facts of each

case, given the activities of the port, the number of vessels

which berth at it, together with the volume of goods that are

imported. While it does not lie in the mouth of the Port Trust to

state that it has no place in which to keep goods after they are

destuffed – as in the facts in the present case – yet a court

may, in the facts of an individual case, look into practical

difficulties faced by the Port Trust. This may lead to the “short

period” in the facts of a particular case being slightly longer
86
than in a case where a port is less frequented, and goods that

      are stored are lesser in number, given the amount of space in

      which the goods can be stored.
83. Having answered the questions that have been posed before this

   Court, we do not, on the facts of this case, think that the justice of the

   case demands that we should interfere with the impugned High Court

   judgment. The steamer agents themselves did not dispute liability to

   pay ground rent upto 75 days before the High Court, and have

   admittedly paid the said charges long ago. As a matter of fact, the

   steamer agents paid ground rent even beyond the period of 75 days –

   the High Court having ordered the Appellant Port Trust to recompute

   the liability of the steamer agents, and return the balance to the parties

   concerned within two months from the date of receipt of a copy of the

   impugned judgment. To order a refund of ground rent paid for 75 days

   to the steamer agent, and direct the Board to then recover the same

   from the importer, consignor and/or the owner of the goods at this late

   stage of the proceedings would not be in the interest of justice.
84. Accordingly, we dispose of the appeals that have been filed against

   the impugned High Court judgment. The impugned judgment is set

   aside on one question of law, namely, that the expression “may” in

   sections 61 and 62 of the MPT Act cannot be read as “shall”, subject
87
to the caveat that as the “State” under
Article 12
of the Constitution, a

    Port Trust must act reasonably, and attempt to sell the goods within a

    reasonable period from the date on which it has assumed custody of

    them.
…………..………………J.
                                                    (R. F. Nariman)


                                                    ……..……………………J.
                                                    (Navin Sinha)


                                                    ……..……………………J.
                                                    (Indira Banerjee)


New Delhi.
5th August, 2020.
88