[Cites
49
, Cited by
1
]
Supreme Court of India
M.C.Mehta vs Union Of India on 14 August, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 SC 684
Author:
Arun Mishra
Bench:
Krishna Murari
,
B.R. Gavai
,
Arun Mishra
1

                                                                  REPORTABLE

                             IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA

                         CIVIL ORIGINAL/ APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.4677 OF 1985




           M.C. MEHTA                                     ..PETITIONER

                                         VERSUS

           UNION OF INDIA & ORS.                          ..RESPONDENT(S)

                                          WITH

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.266 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.263 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.264 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.450 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.464 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.470 OF 2006

                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.569 OF 2006

                          WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.563 OF 2006

                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.610 OF 2006

                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.212 OF 2008

                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.229 OF 2008
Signature Not Verified



                           WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) NO.144 OF 2009
Digitally signed by
GULSHAN KUMAR
ARORA
Date: 2020.08.14
15:04:45 IST
Reason:




                                           AND
                                     2

           SPECIAL LEAVE PETITION (C) NO.33454 OF 2018




                               JUDGMENT
ARUN MISHRA, J.
IN RE: ISSUE RELATING TO JURISDICTION OF THE MONITORING
COMMITTEE
1.    We are dealing with the authority of the “Monitoring Committee to seal

the residential premises on the private land” particularly when they are not

being used for the “commercial purpose”. Whether the Monitoring Committee

could have sealed these residential premises is the only question which we

are examining in this order.
2.    Report No.149 dated 2.4.2019 submitted by the Monitoring Committee

concerning specific unauthorized constructions allegedly carried out in the

Vasant Kunj and Rajokari area.     These constructions were not on public

land. The respective persons owned the land, and the Committee had

submitted that a letter was received from the SDM, Mehrauli on 22.2.2019

regarding unauthorized construction in Vasant Kunj, Delhi.
3.    A reply was filed on behalf of the residents that various residential

premises were sealed where constructions were made long back. There was

no authority with the Monitoring Committee to seal purely residential

premises. It was pointed out that their structure was in consonance with
3
the Master Plan (MPD­2021) within Low Density Residential Area (LDRA)

modified vide Notification No.S.O.1199 (E) dated 10.5.2013 and Notification

No.S.O.1744 (E) dated 18.6.2013.        Reliance was placed on the various

bylaws/statutory    provisions.   It   was   submitted   that   the   Monitoring

Committee was not authorized to take action, and the residential premises

should be de­sealed. It was also pointed out that compounding has been

made in some cases.     The structure should not be demolished, given the

provisions of the applicable acts, by­laws, and policy. It has to be regularized

for which prayer was pending before concerned authorities.
4.    It was further contended that it is a residential area, farmhouses were

notified as Low­Density Residential Areas, and the premises were used as

residential premises. They are in accord with MPD­2021. “Mehrauli” is an

urbanized village. The Monitoring Committee was not empowered to seal the

premises used for residential purposes.       It was permissible to raise the

construction for the use of a residence as provided under Clause 4.4.3 G of

MPD­2021. Reliance has also been placed on NDRA Policy.
5.    We have heard Shri Ranjit Kumar, Ms. Anitha Shenoy and Shri A.D.N.

Rao, learned Amicus Curiae, Shri Rakesh Khanna, Shri Siddharth Luthra,

Shri Mukul Rohatgi, Shri R.C. Mishra, Shri Nalin Kohli, Shri Wasim A.

Qadri, Shri Sanjiv Sen, learned senior counsel, Shri Tushar Mehta, learned

Solicitor General, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned Addl. Solicitor General, Shri

D.N. Goburdhan, Shri Naveen Kumar, Ms. Karuna Nundy, learned counsel

and other learned counsel appearing for the parties.
4
6.     Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned Amicus Curiae with his usual vigour

urged that Writ Petition (C) No.4677 of 1985 was filed in this Court regarding

environment in Delhi, shifting of heavy industries, noxious industries,

stopping of all mining in Aravali hills in and around Delhi including

demolition of colonies built on forest land, misuse of premises (misuse

includes unauthorized construction), i.e., construction without sanction,

lack of civic amenities and the need for their upgradation, etc. This Court

appointed the Monitoring Committee in the year 2006. Various orders have

been referred to submit that the Monitoring Committee is entitled to inspect

premises in which any illegal construction has been made. This Court

restored its power on 6.12.2017. A Special Task Force was set up to ensure

that the order of the court and applicable bylaws were implemented. LDRA

Policy in derogation of the MPD­2021 is notified on 7.2.2007.
7.    Learned Amicus attracted the attention of this Court to orders dated

24.4.2018, 8.5.2018, 15.5.2018, 18.5.2018, 24.5.2018, and various other

orders and certain reports, which we will refer later. He has pointed out that

the Special Task Force was constituted on 25.4.2018.            The Monitoring

Committee    has   the   power   to   seal   unauthorized   construction,   and

regularization thereof cannot be allowed. He has attracted the attention of

this Court to the O.M. dated 23.5.2018 issued by the Government of India

containing an action plan for monitoring of all construction activities in

Delhi and fixing responsibility in case of violations of MPD­2021 for

unauthorized encroachments and other illegal construction activities.
8.    Learned Amicus Curiae also argued that the Monitoring Committee is
5
authorized to see construction with sanction plan or construction contrary to

sanction plan. Alternatively, it was submitted by the learned Amicus that in

case this Court comes to the conclusion that the Monitoring Committee was

not entrusted with the power concerning residential premises when they

were not being used for “commercial purpose” as the power of sealing was

exercised (as per Report No.149) bonafidely on the request made by the SDM

and any order, which may be passed and ordered to be prospective in

operation.
9.    Ms. Ashwariya Bhati, learned Additional Solicitor General appearing

on behalf of the Ministry of Housing and Environment submitted that the

Monitoring   Committee    is   entitled   to   inspect   the   premises   where

encroachments are there on public land. Attention has been invited to this

Court’s order dated 3.1.2012, which was recalled vide judgment and order

dated 15.12.2017.     This Court on 15.12.2017 ordered the Monitoring

Committee to continue to work as it was doing before 3.1.2012. This Court

constituted the Monitoring Committee on 23.4.2006 for the limited purpose

of addressing the use of “residential premises for commercial purpose”.

Despite the limited mandate to the Monitoring Committee, it illegally sealed

other premises. A Special Task Force has been constituted as per order

dated 24.4.2018 to remove the encroachments on public roads, public

streets, and pedestrian street, and it was for the Monitoring Committee to

suggest to the Special Task Force the areas where immediate action was

required to be taken concerning aforesaid aspect. The Special Task Force

was constituted under
section 5(3)
of the Delhi Development Act, 1957.
6
Thus, it is a statutory body.          It has the task of overseeing the

implementation of the applicable laws regarding illegal constructions,

encroachment on public land, public parks, parking places, roads,

pavements, etc. Special Task Force is taking adequate action as and when a

violation is reported.
10.   Shri D.N. Goburdhan, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the

Government of NCT of Delhi, has raised the following arguments:
a.
That the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
(for short, “the
DMC

Act
”) is a complete code by itself. The Delhi Municipal Corporation is a

statutory body which cannot be deprived of its functions.         He has also

attracted the attention of this Court to the Building Regulations and to
sections 334
and
335
of the DMC Act relating to sanctions, additions,

alterations, and its power to take action in appropriate cases. He submitted

that the
DMC Act
is a complete code by itself as it provides how the sealing

is to be done, when it is to be enforced, and in case of its failure, the remedy

is provided under
section 490
.     Statutory appeals are provided under the
DMC Act
to the Appellate Tribunal and the Administrator.            A complete

regulatory mechanism is provided for the sealing operation of properties.
Thus, it cannot be deprived to exercise its powers conferred by the

Monitoring Committee under the
DMC Act
.
b.    This Court appointed the Monitoring Committee on 16.2.2006 only to

prevent misuse of residential premises for commercial use and not with

respect to residential premises used for residential purposes.        Once the

Monitoring Committee does the sealing, no statutory appeal lies before the
7
Appellate Tribunal constituted under
section 347(A)
and
347(B)
of the Act.
The Statutory Appeals were transferred to the Monitoring Committee, which

ordered the sealing of the premises. The principle of natural justice was thus

thrown to winds. The order appointing the Monitoring Committee was for

limited purpose and power was passed under
Article 142
of the Constitution.
The order too deserves to be recalled in view of the decisions of this Court in
A.R Antulay vs. R.S. Nayak & Anr.
(
1988) 2 SCC 602, Bonkya vs. State of

Maharashtra
(1995) 6 SCC 447, Prem Chand Garg v. Executing Commissioner

U.P., AIR 1963 SC 996 and SCBA vs. Union of India (1998) 4 SCC 409.
c.    That the executive, legislative and judicial functions of the statutory

bodies are demarcated under the Constitution, and statutory provisions

cannot be taken away by the Monitoring Committee. Reliance is placed on

Arif Hameed v. State of J & K, (1989) Supp. [2] SCC 364.
d.    The legislature has conferred statutory power to seal or demolish on

the Municipal Corporation, and Monitoring Committee cannot exercise its

power in total abrogation to the powers of the statutory bodies.
11.   Shri Rakesh Khanna, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of

the LAC’s Federation of Delhi, submitted that this Court on 15.12.2017

passed judgment and order with respect to sealing of the residential

premises used for commercial purposes in Delhi. The Monitoring Committee

has exercised power unauthorizedly.       The orders were passed in order to

stop the unauthorized commercial use of the land earmarked for residential

purposes, as provided in the Zonal Plan. The Monitoring Committee without
8
power sealed the premises, which were in the commercial area for

commercial use. He has attracted our attention to certain provisions of the

Master Plan. Concerning the aforesaid aspects, we do not propose to deal

with it in the instant order.    We propose to deal only with the limited

question whether the Monitoring Committee is empowered by this Court to

seal the residential premises.   We leave the question of commercial plots

raised by Shri Khanna to be dealt with separately.
12.   Shri Khanna further argued that the Monitoring Committee had no

power to seal purely residential premises. He has attracted our attention to

this Court’s order by which it was constituted, and various other judgments

and orders passed in this regard.        He has argued that the Monitoring

Committee kept quiet, pursuant to the query made by this Court on

7.5.2019 as to whether in past, before Report No.149 was submitted, the

Monitoring Committee sealed the residential premises which were not being

used for commercial purposes.        No past instance was given by the

Monitoring Committee regarding sealing of residential premises used for

residential purposes, particularly when it was not made on public land. He

has also argued with respect to LDRA Policy and as to permissible

regularization.
13.   Shri Nalin Kohli, learned senior counsel has taken this Court through

various orders passed by this Court and the Report of the Monitoring

Committee to submit that this Court appointed the Monitoring Committee

for the limited purpose of checking commercial misuse of the residential

properties.   At no point in time, this Court authorized the Monitoring
9
Committee to seal the residential premises used for the residential purposes

that too situated on private land. Thus, the action of sealing such houses is

unwarranted and illegal.
14.   Shri Naveen Kumar, learned counsel, has invited our attention to the

order dated 7.5.2019. This Court sought the Monitoring Committee to

specify with respect to its power conferred by the court and secondly, any

prior example where the Monitoring Committee sealed such premises. The

Monitoring Committee referred to the orders dated 23.11.2006, 12.2.2007,

9.3.2007, and 10.4.2007 to justify its action. It was argued that the orders

relied upon by the Committee are not at all relevant for sealing of such

premises.   The Monitoring Committee was appointed only to prevent

commercial misuse of the residential properties. The subsequent orders

indicate that it was authorized to deal with the encroachment and

unauthorized colonies on public land.
15.   On behalf of the incumbents whose property has been sealed as per

the report No.149, similar submissions have been raised. The Monitoring

Committee was given limited powers, which was divested on 30.4.2012.

Later vide order dated 6.12.2017, the Monitoring Committee was restored

with the power it exercised earlier. A Special Task Force had been

constituted on 25.4.2018 pursuant to the order passed by this Court.
16.   Ms. Karuna Nundy, learned counsel, argued that under Article 300­A

of the Constitution, a person cannot be deprived of its property otherwise

than the due procedure of law, is supported by series of judgments of this
10
Court. When the Monitoring Committee is not empowered to deal with such

residential premises, it could not have acted. The detailed procedure is

provided under the
DMC Act
along with the Appellate Tribunal under
sections 347A
and
347B
of the DMC Act. The Monitoring Committee, unless

specifically authorized by this Court, could not violate the procedure under

the
DMC Act
. Reliance has been placed by the learned counsel on the

various decisions to be referred to later.
(i)     Particularly when the Monitoring Committee is not empowered to take

any such action, no appeal lies against the action of the Monitoring

Committee. Only it hears a representation. Not even the High Court can

interfere in the functioning of the Monitoring Committee.
(ii)    Even with respect to the encroachment on public roads, public streets,

and pedestrian streets, the Special Task Force is authorized to take action.
Thus, the Monitoring Committee's power after the constitution of Special

Task Force is further restricted, and it is for the Monitoring Committee to

suggest to the Special Task Force with respect to the encroachment on the

public land, roads, and public places.
(iii)   The range of remedies available to the owner of the property in the

residential premises' occupation cannot be deprived of by the Monitoring

Committee. The provisions regarding demolition and stoppage of buildings

and works in certain cases are contained in
section 343
of the DMC Act,
section 345
deals with power of the Commissioner to require alteration of the

work;
section 347A
provides for an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal,
section 347B
deals with appeals against certain orders and notices issued
11
under the Act and
section 347E
deals with the bar of jurisdiction of courts.

Once the statutory right is conferred, it cannot be dealt with by the

Monitoring Committee until and unless it is authorized.


DISCUSSION:
17.   The Monitoring Committee was appointed and empowered by this

Court to take action within the powers conferred. In the teeth of various

statutes, it would act strictly within the four corners of the powers conferred

on it by this Court.
18.   When we consider the various orders passed by this Court from time

to time, before the constitution of the Monitoring Committee, we find that

this Court at no point in time has empowered the Monitoring Committee to

take action with respect to residential premises not used for commercial

purpose. This Court initially passed an order on 7.5.2004 and constituted

the Monitoring Committee comprising of (i) Chief Secretary of Delhi, (ii)

Commissioner of Police, Delhi, (iii) Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of

Delhi and (iv) Vice­Chairman of Delhi Development Authority. It was ordered

that Monitoring Committee would be responsible for the stoppage of illegal

industrial activities. The order dated 7.5.2004 is extracted hereunder:
“Hon’ble Mr. Justice Y.K. Sabharwal pronounced the
          judgment of the Court issuing directions in terms of the signed
          judgment.
A Monitoring Committee comprising (i) Chief Secretary
          of Delhi (ii) Commissioner of Police, Delhi (iii) Commissioner,
          Municipal Corporation of Delhi and, (iv) Vice-Chairman of
          Delhi Development Authority has been appointed. This
          Committee would be responsible for stoppage of illegal
          industrial activity. It would, however, be open to the aforesaid
          members of the Monitoring Committee to appoint responsible
          officers subordinate to them to oversee and ensure compliance of
12
the directions contained in the judgment.
The first Progress Report by the Committee shall be filed
         by 31st August, 2004 and thereafter it shall be filed at least once
         in a period of every two months.”
19.   (i) The Monitoring Committee was constituted by this Court vide

judgment and order dated 16.2.2006 in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India & Ors
,

(2006) 3 SCC 399. Following is the relevant portion:
“1. In respect of large number of immovable properties
         throughout Delhi, flagrant violations of various laws including
         municipal laws, master plan and other plans besides
         environmental laws have been engaging the attention of this
         Court for number of years. With a view to secure the
         implementation of laws and protect fundamental rights of the
         citizens, various orders were passed from time to time.
2. This Court has a constitutional duty to protect the fundamental
         rights of Indian citizens. What happens when violators and/or
         abettors of the violations are those, who have been entrusted by
         law with a duty to protect these rights? The task becomes
         difficult and also requires urgent intervention by court so that the
         rule of law is preserved and people may not lose faith in it,
         finding violations at the hands of supposed implementers. The
         problem is not of the absence of law, but of its implementation.
3. Considering such large-scale flagrant violations, this Court
         had to prioritise as to which violations may be taken up first and
         then issue appropriate directions. In this view, at first instance,
         directions were issued in respect of shifting of hazardous and
         noxious industries out of Delhi. Directions were also issued for
         shifting of heavy and large industries as also some extensive
         industries. For shifting polluting industries had to be given
         topmost priority. Later, directions were issued for shifting of
         other extensive industries considering the continued
         unauthorised use contrary to master plan and zonal plan, by
         those industries as well as some other industries continuing in
         residential/non-conforming areas.
5. With regard to commercial use of premises in residential
         areas, it has been more than three years i.e. 30-9-2002 when the
         order was made directing respondents to file reply. In fact, the
         question of misuse of residential premises for commercial
         purposes was taken up even earlier as is apparent from the orders
         dated 31-7-2001 and 20-2-2002. By order dated 31-7-2001
13
passed in
News Item AQFMY v. Central Pollution Control
               Board1
the Court directed that:
“MCD will also inform this Court in the affidavit to be
                    filed as to why no requisite action has been taken for
                    stopping the gross misuse of buildings in the residential
                    areas for commercial purposes and in the construction of
                    commercial buildings in residential areas where only
                    residential usage is permitted.”
6. Again on 20-2-2002, the order dated 31-7-2001 was reiterated
               in the following terms:
“MCD is also directed to file within four weeks from
                     today an affidavit indicating as to what it intends to do for
                     stopping the misuse of the buildings in the residential areas
                     which are being used for commercial purposes as has been
                     directed by this Court’s order dated 31-7-2001. If no
                     affidavit is filed, the explanation in respect thereof should
                     be given to the Court by the Municipal Commissioner.”
11. By the impugned judgment dated 31-5-2002, disposing of the
               aforenoted writ petition and other connected matters, a Full
               Bench of the High Court came to the conclusion that neither
               under the
DMC Act
nor under the Delhi Development Act, was
               there any power to seal property for its misuse, inter alia, holding
               that the power of sealing of premises is drastic as by reason of
               such sealing, a person could become homeless, thus, affecting
               his human or fundamental rights and that the power of sealing in
               relation to misuse has been intentionally excluded from the
               provisions of the two Acts. Later, some other matters were also
               decided by the High Court following the Full Bench decision.
Those judgments are also under challenge.”
                                                               (emphasis supplied)


           Following questions were framed by this Court for consideration:
“13. The questions to be determined are:
A. Whether MCD under the
DMC Act
has power to seal the
                    premises in case of its misuser?
B. Whether DDA, under the Delhi Development Act, has
                    also similar power of sealing or not?
C. Directions to be issued in respect of residential
                    properties used illegally for commercial purposes.
14. In these matters, we are considering only the issue of
               misuser. We are not considering the issue of unauthorised
               constructions.”
1
W.P. No.725 of 1994 dated 31-7-2001
14
(emphasis supplied)
(ii)    It is apparent that the only question for consideration of this Court

was the misuse of the residential premises for illegal or commercial

purposes. In paragraph 14 (quoted above), this Court made it clear that it

did not consider the issue of unauthorized constructions.                  This Court

considered the plight of the residential areas in para 33 of the judgment,

where it noted large­scale conversion of residential premises for commercial

use, thus:
“33. Keeping future needs in view, experts prepare master plans.
           Perusal of the Delhi Master Plans, 1962 and 2001 shows what
           were plan projections. At the time of planning, the experts in the
           field of town planning take into account various aspects, such as,
           healthy living, environment, lung space need, land use intensity,
           areas where the residential houses are to be built and where the
           commercial buildings are to be located, need of household
           industries, etc. Provision for household industries in residential
           areas does not mean converting residential houses into
           commercial shops. It only means permitting activities of
           household industry in a part of a residential property. It does not
           mean that residential properties can be used for commercial and
           trading activities and sale and purchase of goods. Master plan
           contemplates shops in district centres, community centres, local
           shopping centres, etc. and not in residential areas. Be that as it
           may, for the present, we are not considering the cases of small
           shops opened in residential houses for catering to day-to-day
           basic needs, but are considering large-scale conversion, in
           flagrant violation of laws, of residential premises for commercial
           use.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
(iii)   The court further considered that none has the right, human or

fundamental, to violate the law with immunity and claim any right to use a

building for a purpose other than authorized, thus:
“35. In the impugned judgment, while dealing with the
           provisions of the layout plan, it was observed that the provisions
           for user “are only regulatory in nature”. While dealing with the
15
user, the High Court observed that “the power, whereby and
          whereunder the basic human rights or the fundamental rights
          conferred upon a person is taken away, must be specifically
          conferred by a statute”. The provisions of user may be regulatory
          but all the same, they are mandatory and binding. In fact, almost
          all the planning provisions are regulatory. The violations of the
          regulatory provisions on massive scale can result in plans
          becoming merely scraps of paper. That is the ground reality in
          the capital of the country. None has any right, human or
          fundamental, to violate the law with immunity and claim any
          right to use a building for a purpose other than authorised.
          Further, the words “unless the context otherwise requires” in
Section 331
of the DMC Act are of no consequence for
          determining the point in issue as the context herein does not
          provide otherwise for the present purposes. It does not provide
          that the power of sealing under
Section 345-A
cannot be
          exercised in case of misuser. In view of the clear language of
Section 345-A
, we are also unable to sustain the view of the
          High Court that action under
Section 345-A
can be taken only
          when there exists order of demolition under
Section 343
or an
          order under sub-section (1) of
Section 344
. The conclusion of the
          High Court that action under
Section 345-A
can be taken only
          when there exists an order of demolition under
Section 343
, or
          on passing of an order under sub-section (1) of
Section 344
, and
          in no other contingency cannot be accepted in view of the clear
          provision of
Section 345-A
that action can be taken even before
          or after an order is made under those provisions.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
(iv)   The court eventually issued directions in respect of other residential

properties used illegally for commercial purposes, thus:
“47.
In special leave petitions and Civil Appeals Nos.608-11 of
          2003 challenge is to the judgments of the High Court disposing
          of writ petitions in terms of law
laid down by
the Full Bench.
50. In respect of CA No.608 of 2003, MCD issued to the
          respondents, a show-cause notice dated 1-8-2000 under
Section
          345-A
read with
Sections 347
,
343
and
344
of the DMC Act
          stating that Property No. 39, Ring Road, Lajpat Nagar III was
          being misused in the name and style of “Jagdish Store”. In reply
          dated 15-9-2000, it was, inter alia, stated that MCD itself has
          been allowing non-residential activities in residential areas under
a special scheme, without, however, giving any details or filing
          any document in support thereof. Further, we asked the learned
          counsel for the respondents to place on record the plan for the
          construction of the building which may have been sanctioned so
16
as to ascertain whether the sanction was for construction of the
residential property or commercial property. The plan has not
been filed. The reasons are not far to seek. One of the simple
methods for ascertaining that there is misuser or not, is to
examine the sanctioned plan.
51. At this stage, it would be useful to notice letter dated 28-8-
2000 sent by the Ministry of Urban Development to the
Commissioner, MCD, Vice-Chairman, DDA and other
authorities conveying the deep concern of Parliament
Consultative Committee over the rising menace of unauthorised
construction, suspected connivance of the staff of the different
authorities in the matter and requesting the authorities to take
strong and prompt action and suggesting ten measures for strict
enforcement. The letter reads as under:
“Annexure R-1
                     No. J-13036/3/96-DDIIB
                        Government of India
    Ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation,
                   Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
Dated: 28-8-2000
    To,
1. Shri P.S. Bhatnagar,
    Chief Secretary,
    Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi,
    Delhi.
2. Shri P.K. Ghosh,
    Vice-Chairman,
    Delhi Development Authority,
    Vikas Sadan, INA, New Delhi.
3. Shri S.P. Aggarwal,
    Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Delhi,
    Town Hall, Delhi.
4. Shri B.P. Misra,
    Chairperson,
    New Delhi Municipal Committee,
    Palika Kendra, New Delhi.
5. The Development Commissioner,
    Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi,
    Town Hall, New Delhi.
Subject: Unauthorised encroachment and illegal constructions in
Delhi
   Sir,
17
I am directed to say that the menace of illegal
encroachment/unauthorised construction in Delhi has been
considered by the Government of India at its highest level and it
has been decided to eliminate this menace with a firm hand. You
are, therefore, requested to take strong and prompt action against
all illegal constructions/unauthorised encroachments and also
against misuses of land in violation of the provisions of the
master plan of Delhi. The following measures are particularly
required to be enforced strictly:
(i) All illegal constructions should be demolished, not
      cosmetically but in toto.
(ii) The cost of demolition should be recovered from the
      illegal builders within 15 days of demolition. In case of
      non-payment within 15 days, the amount due should be
      recovered as arrears of land revenue.
(iii) In all cases of illegal constructions, prosecution
      should invariably be launched against builders under the
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, the Delhi Development
      Act, the New Delhi Municipal Council Act
, etc. and the
      cases      followed     vigorously     with     the     police
      authorities/courts.
(iv) Wherever the property is on lease, action should be
      taken under the terms and conditions of lease agreement
      and re-entry effected within the shortest permissible period
      under such lease agreement. After re-entry, physical
      possession of the property should be taken by invoking the
      provisions of the Public Premises Eviction Act and
      damages collected immediately. The rates of
      damages/misuse charges should be the same as per the
      formula followed by the L&DO and approved by the
      Ministry of Urban Development.
(v) In case of DDA flats, where constructions have
      come up beyond the condonable limits, cancellation of
      allotment should be carried out in addition to the
      demolition of the additional construction. Orders in respect
      of condonable and non-condonable items are being issued
      separately.
(vi) In cases, where after demolition, reconstruction is
      done, personal responsibility of the officer-in-charge should
      be fixed and departmental action taken against him.
(vii) In cases where illegal constructions have taken
      place on rural agricultural lands, action under the
      provisions of the
Delhi Land Reforms Act, 1954
, should
      also be taken and such lands should be taken over as per
      provisions of the
Delhi Land Reforms Act
. Action in this
      respect should be taken as soon as the plots are cut by the
18
colonisers and construction done in the shape of boundary
       walls, etc. In other words, construction should be nipped in
       the bud. If it comes up, it should be demolished
       immediately. Action in this respect should also be taken by
       the local agencies concerned/DDA as per the bye-laws
       pertaining to layout/service plans, etc.
(viii) In all cases where party obtains stay/status quo
       orders, prompt action to get the stay order vacated should
       be taken and higher court moved, wherever necessary.
(ix) All Senior Field Officers should be asked to carry
       out physical inspection of the area under their charge and
       the Supervising Officer should also make surprise checks to
       ensure that the subordinate staff takes immediate action to
       check/demolish unauthorised construction. Deterrent action
       should also be taken against the subordinate staff such as
       Building Inspectors, Junior Engineers, Assistant Engineers,
       etc. who do not take prompt action.
(x) Field Officers should be asked to maintain field
       diaries and submit them to the Supervisory Officer
       regularly.
2. It is also requested that a monthly report should be sent to the
Ministry of Urban Development by the 5th of each succeeding
month.
3. In this connection, it may be noted that both Parliament and
the Parliament Consultative Committee have expressed deep
concern, through questions and interpolations, over the rising
menace of unauthorised constructions in Delhi and the suspected
connivance of the staff of the different authorities in the matter.
A flying squad has been constituted in the Ministry and if, as a
result of findings of this squad, it is found that the subordinate
staff has not done its duty or not carried out the aforesaid
instructions, strict action against the subordinate/supervisory
staff would be taken by the Government.
Yours faithfully,
                                                         Sd./-
(Dr. Nivedita P. Haran)
                          Joint Secretary to the Government of India
Copy for information and necessary action to:
1. Deputy CVO, Ministry of UD&PA,
    Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. L&DO, Ministry of UD&PA, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
3. DG(W), CPWD, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi.
Sd/-
(N.L. Upadhyay)
19
53. Now, we revert to the task of implementation. Despite its
         difficulty, this Court cannot remain a mute spectator when the
         violations also affect the environment and healthy living of law-
         abiders. The enormity of the problem which, to a great extent, is
         the doing of the authorities themselves, does not mean that a
         beginning should not be made to set things right. If the entire
         misuser cannot be stopped at one point of time because of its
         extensive nature, then it has to be stopped in a phased manner,
         beginning with major violators. There has to be a will to do it.
         We have hereinbefore noted in brief the orders made in the last
         so many years but it seems the same has had no effect on the
         authorities. The things cannot be permitted to go on in this
         manner forever. On one hand, various laws are enacted, master
         plans are prepared by expert planners, provision is made in the
         plans also to tackle the problem of existing unauthorised
         constructions and misusers and, on the other hand, such illegal
         activities go on unabated openly under the gaze of everyone,
         without having any respect and regard for law and other citizens.
         We have noticed above the complaints of some of the residents
         in respect of such illegalities. For the last number of years even
         the High Court has been expressing similar anguish in the orders
         made in large number of cases. We may briefly notice some of
         those orders.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
(v)   The court focused on the misuse of the property and further observed

in para 61 regarding misuse thus:
“61. Despite passing of the laws and repeated orders of the High
         Court and this Court, the enforcement of the laws and the
         implementations of the orders are utterly lacking. If the laws are
         not enforced and the orders of the courts to enforce and
         implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be total
         lawlessness. It is, therefore, necessary to also identify and take
         appropriate action against officers responsible for this state of
         affairs. Such blatant misuse of properties at large-scale cannot
         take place without connivance of the officers concerned. It is
         also a source of corruption. Therefore, action is also necessary to
         check corruption, nepotism and total apathy towards the rights of
         the citizens. Those who own the properties that are misused have
         also implied responsibility towards the hardship, inconvenience,
         suffering caused to the residents of the locality and injuries to
         third parties. It is, therefore, not only the question of stopping the
         misuser but also making the owners at default accountable for
         the injuries caused to others. Similar would also be the
20
accountability of errant officers as well since, prima facie, such
          large-scale misuser, in violation of laws, cannot take place
          without the active connivance of the officers. It would be for the
          officers to show what effective steps were taken to stop the
          misuser.”
(vi)   Ultimately, the court has passed the following order while appointing

the Monitoring Committee:
“69. Having held that the Commissioner of MCD has power
          under the
DMC Act
to seal premises in case of its misuser, we
          issue the following directions for taking immediate steps to seal
          residential premises being used for commercial purpose:
1. MCD shall within 10 days give wide publicity in the
          leading newspapers directing major violations on main roads
          (some instances of such violators and roads have been noted
          hereinbefore) to stop misuser on their own, within the period of
          30 days.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the owner/occupier to file
          within 30 days an affidavit with the Commissioner of MCD
          stating that the misuser has been stopped.
3. In case misuser is not stopped, sealing of the premises shall
          commence after 30 days, from the date of public notice, first
          taking up the violations on roads which are 80 ft wide and more.
All authorities are directed to render full assistance and
          cooperation. After expiry of 30 days from the date of public
          notice, electricity and water supply shall be disconnected.
4. Details of the roads and the violations shall also be placed
          on the website by MCD and copies also sent to Resident Welfare
          Associations of the area which should be involved in the process
          of sealing of misuser. The Commissioner of MCD shall file an
          affidavit, within two weeks, in terms of directions contained in
          this judgment, whereafter directions for constitution of the
          monitoring committee would be issued. The sealing would be
          effected by the officers authorised by the Commissioner of MCD
          in consultation with the monitoring committee.
5. The appropriate directions for action, if any, against the
          officers responsible for the misuse and for payment of
          compensation by them and by violators would be issued after the
          misuser is stopped.
6. None will tamper with the seals. Any tampering with seal
          will be sternly dealt with. Tampering with seal will include
          opening another entrance for use of premises.
21
7. It would be open to the owner/occupier to approach the
          Commissioner for removal of the seal on giving undertaking that
          the premises would be put to only authorised use.
8. Particulars of cases where violators may have obtained
          orders of stay will be filed in this Court by MCD.
9. MCD shall file monthly status report as to action taken by
          15th of each month commencing from 10-4-2006.
10.
In case misuser is not stopped in the premises involved in
          the civil appeals and special leave petitions, subject to what is
          stated in this judgment, MCD will take immediate steps to seal
          those premises soon after expiry of 30 days.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)

      It is clear from the above­mentioned order dated 16.2.2006 in
M.C.

Mehta v. Union of India
(supra) that this Court noted unauthorized

construction but appointed the Monitoring Committee to put a restraint on

the misuse of the residential premises for the unauthorized/commercial

purpose. Pursuant to the order dated 16.2.2006, the Monitoring Committee

was formed on 24.3.2006.
20.   The court again emphasized that its order should be carried out in

letter and spirit in the case of
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
reported in (2006)

3 SCC 429 passed on 24.3.2006 thus:
“4. In order to oversee the implementation of the law, namely,
          sealing of offending premises in terms of the letter and spirit of
          this Court’s directions, it is necessary to appoint a Monitoring
          Committee instead of leaving any discretion with the officers of
          MCD. Accordingly, we appoint a Monitoring Committee
          comprising of Mr K.J. Rao, Former Advisor to the Election
          Commissioner, Mr Bhure Lal, Chairman, EPCA and Major
          General (Retd.) Som Jhingan. We direct that all necessary
          facilities shall be supplied by MCD to the members of the
          Monitoring Committee, including the facility of transport,
          secretarial services, honorarium, etc.
9. IAs Nos.1921, 1922 and 1923 have been filed by three
          associations whereas IAs Nos.1918-19 have been filed by an
          individual business house. The applicant of IA No.1919 has filed
22
an affidavit giving an undertaking to this Court to stop the
         misuser within the time granted by this Court. The applications
         filed on behalf of the associations state that in the event of this
         Court granting time, they would ensure that the benefit of time is
         given only to those who file individual affidavit and undertaking
         as per the directions of this Court. In the order dated 16-2-2006,
         the Court has already pointed out the extent, nature and
         magnitude of the contravention of various laws. Be that as it
         may, we grant not only to the applicant associations or their
         members but to others too, time to stop the misuser up to 30-6-
2006 subject to every individual claiming such benefit filing
         affidavit stating that (1) on or before 30-6-2006, misuser shall be
         stopped and no further extension on any ground whatsoever shall
         be asked for, (2) giving an undertaking to the effect that violation
         of condition of not stopping the misuser by 30-6-2006 would
         subject him/her to the offence of perjury and contempt of court
         for violation of the order of the Court. The benefit will be
         available only to those who file the affidavit with MCD on or
         before 28-3-2006.”
                                                        (emphasis supplied)
      This Court directed to prevent misuse of the property in accordance

with the previous order to mean that residential premises/ area should not

be used for commercial purposes. A large number of reports of the

Monitoring Committee carried ‘Caption’ “REPORT OF THE MONITORING

COMMITTEE, SEALING OF THE COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS IN

RESIDENTIAL PREMISES”.
21.   In Report No.8, the Monitoring Committee reported liquor shops in

convenient/local shopping centers located in residential areas and other

professional activities. This Court passed an order on 18.10.2006 regarding

Report No.8 thus:
"I.A.No.1983:
In view of the order passed in I.A.No.1980 above, this
         application stands disposed of.
Report No.8 of the Monitoring Committee:
We have perused the 8th report of the Monitoring
23
Committee dated 17th October, 2006.
The recommendation contained in para 1 of the report,
except last three lines, are accepted. The said three lines read as
under:
“In addition, it is presumed by the Monitoring Committee
      that small shops will also be allowed in A & B category of
      colonies as per the Hon’ble Court’s order dated
      29.09.2006.”
        The learned Solicitor General, on instructions, states that
the Government is not contemplating to allow small shops in
colonies of category A & B. In this view of the stand, the afore-
quoted recommendation is not accepted.
In respect of para 4 of the report relating to the sealing of
liquor shops in convenient/local shopping centres located in
residential areas, we find no ground to direct sealing of liquor
shops. The convenient/local shopping centres are in the
commercial areas earmarked in residential areas and there does
not appear to be any legal impediment for the liquor trade to be
conducted from the said commercial areas. However, the liquor
trade cannot be permitted to be carried on in mixed land use
since the first floor onwards are expected to be used for
residential purposes only and thus liquor trade in such residential
areas cannot be allowed to be continued. This part of
recommendation in para 4 of the report is accepted.
Regarding recommendations 5 and 6 regarding
professional activities and the basement are concerned, learned
Solicitor General states that since the matter is under
consideration of the Government, for the present, the sealing in
respect thereof may not be continued. Learned counsel further
states that it will take about six weeks to decide these matters.
Further, it may be noted that in para 21(v)(e) of our order dated
29th September, 2006, for illustrative purpose, only four
professions were mentioned but it is clear that other professions
are not excluded. The term ‘professionals’ has been made
inclusive by use of the word ‘including’. In view of the above,
for the present, sealing need not continue in respect of the
activities mentioned in para 5 and 6 of the report of the
Monitoring Committee.
The recommendation in regard to desealing, contained in
para 7 of the report, is also accepted.
The Municipal Corporation of Delhi is directed to file its
report/response, within four weeks, in regard to what is stated by
the Monitoring Committee in para 8, namely, large number of
building basement, lower basement, ground floor + four floors
having come up in blatant violation of the Building Bye Laws.
In view of the time having been extended as above, the
matter, instead of November, 2006, be now listed in February,
24
2007.
The Monitoring Committee is directed to supply copy of
         each of its report to learned Solicitor General and learned
         counsel for the Municipal Corporation of Delhi.”
                                                     (emphasis supplied)

      It is apparent from the report that it was with respect to misuse of the

residential premises for commercial purpose and unauthorized constructions

on public land.
22.   On 15.11.2006, this Court exempted ration shops and cycle repair

shops running in residential premises from sealing.             Report No.12 was

considered with respect to the misuse of residential premises for commercial

purposes.
23.   This Court passed further order on 23.11.2006, which was also with

respect to misuse of the premises. Undertakings were filed to the effect that

they have stopped commercial activities in the residential premises. The

relevant portion of the order dated 23.11.2006 is extracted hereunder:
“Subject to what we note hereinafter, persons who have either
         earlier or now have stopped commercial activity in terms of the
         undertakings/ affidavits filed but are covered by the two
         notifications above-noted, having regard to the peculiar facts and
         circumstances, are temporarily relieved of the undertakings and
         placed at par with other covered by Direction No.3 of the order
         dated 29th September, 2006. The conditions stipulated in the said
         Direction No.3 would be applicable to such traders/
         professionals. The present order is in continuation of the orders
         passed on 29th September, 2006, 18th October, 2006, 6th
         November, 2006 and 15th November, 2006.
However, thirty four establishments mentioned in Annexure
         ‘A’ will not be entitled to above concession. The Monitoring
         Committee can verify ad if they have not ceased commercial
         activity, the premises shall be sealed and it be ensured that
         commercial activity is not carried on by them.
***      ***    ***
25
In Paragraph (4), it has been noticed that, on a surprise check,
         some buildings were noticed on which certain sofas were put on
         each floor to give it a residential look even through no one
         appears to be living in it and the impression was that though
         building was sanctioned only for residential purposes and no
         commercial activity was going on but fresh commercial activity
         may commence. According to the Municipal Corporation of
         Delhi, as noted therein, where commercial activity has not yet
         commenced, building can be booked for violation of building
         plans. Directions are sought that Municipal Corporation of Delhi
         be asked to issue public notice that no commercial activity/ fresh
         commercial activity shall be allowed without first getting the
         building plans approved and on registration and payment of
         conversion and parking charges. Example of one such stretch of
         road is mentioned in Paragraph (4) from Mool Chand Hospital
         crossing to Ashram Chowk. It is to be made clear that no fresh
         commercial activity in building sanctioned for residential
         purposes can be allowed and on violation being noticed, it would
         be the personal liability of the Deputy Commission of the
         concerned zone to take appropriate action. It will also be the
         personal liability of the concerned Station House Officer to
         inform the concerned officers in the Municipal Corporation of
         Delhi. If, despite that, the commercial activity is noticed, these
         officers shall have to be held personally liable for the
         consequences. Simply booking a building for violation of
         building plans on paper has proved to be totally ineffective.
         There are thousands of buildings which have been booked by the
         Municipal Corporation of Delhi in the las number of years but on
         paper only without any action. The Municipal Corporation of
         Delhi, as suggested in Paragraph (4), shall issue public notice in
         consultation with the Monitoring Committee.”

      It is apparent from the order that the report and the order pertained to

misuse of the residential premises for commercial purposes.
24.   The order dated 12.2.2007 was in relation to the stopping of the

sealing by the Monitoring Committee at the instance of the Municipal

Corporation of Delhi and the Delhi Development Authority until further

orders. It was to be operative only concerning those premises covered under

the MPD­2021 and not for those which were not covered by the Master Plan.

Following order was passed on 12.2.2007:
26
“….In view of this arrangement, the interim order stopping
         sealing by the Monitoring Committee with the assistance of
         MCD and DDA shall remain operative until further orders. This
         order shall be operative only in respect of those premises which
         are covered by the Master Plan, 2021 and not for those which are
         not covered by the Master Plan. ….”
25.   The order dated 9.3.2007 was passed to comply with the order dated

12.2.2007. Following order was passed by this Court on 9.3.2007:
“We have perused the Report No.31 of the Monitoring
         Committee. It needs no reiteration that our order dated
         12.2.2007 shall be carried out to its logical end. Needless to say
         all authorities concerned shall ensure compliance of our order.”

      It is apparent from the order dated 9.3.2007 that the order is in

consonance with the said report, and the report clarifies that it was for

commercial activities and mixed land use. The Monitoring Committee itself

sought permission for continuation of sealing of the portion of the

commercial establishment in the residential areas, which were not covered

by MPD­2021.     Thus, the confusion sought to be created based on MPD­

2021 is absolutely unjustified.     The order dated 10.4.2007 is an interim

order stopping sealing by the Monitoring Committee.            This Court did not

authorize the Monitoring Committee to seal the residential properties being

used for residential purposes.     The order is of no relevance to decide the

question of the authority of the Monitoring Committee.
26.   On IA No.22, this Court in its order dated 10.4.2007 considered

Report No.34, contents of which are placed by following orders:
“We are shocked to find that in spite of our earlier orders,
         there has been a total sense of non-cooperation exhibited by the
         M.C.D. and the police officials. The report of the Monitoring
         Committee shows that on 03.04.2007, 04.04.2007 and
27
09.04.2007, the police authorities did not cooperate in the matter
         of sealing of the unauthorized premises.
Let the Commissioner of Delhi Police and the concerned area
         Police Officers appear in person on 11.04.2007 before this Court
         and file affidavits indicating as to under what circumstances the
         orders of this Court were not carried out and there was non
         cooperation in the matter of sealing. Similar shall be the position
         so far as the Commissioner, M.C.D. is concerned.
The matter shall be listed tomorrow, i.e. 11.04.2007 for this
         purpose only.
These cases shall be listed on 07.05.2007. Before that date,
         learned solicitor General shall indicate the time schedule during
         which the various infrastructural deficiencies pointed out by
         leaned Amicus-Curiae are expected to be taken care of. It needs
         no reiteration that areas which are not covered by the Master
         Plan are not exempted from sealing operations. Only those areas
         and constructions which are prima facie covered by the Master
         Plan, shall be left out of sealing operations.
Report No.34 of the Monitoring Committee shall be kept in a
         sealed cover.
Copies of the Monitoring Committee’s said Report shall be
         given only to the learned counsel for M.C.D., Delhi Police and
         learned Solicitor General.
The Charts submitted by Learned A.C. be kept on record. If
         any person, who has interest in the litigation wants to have a say
         in the matter, that can only be routed through learned Amicus-
         Curiae. The necessary information and materials be given to
         learned Amicus-Curiae.
The response of the DDA shall also be filed which shall be
         taken on record.”

      Report No.34 was not regarding premises used purely for residential

purposes.
27.   This Court passed an order on 3.1.2012, which is extracted

hereunder:
“After hearing Shri Ranjit Kumar, learned amicus on Report
         No.85 and related issues and considering the submissions made
         by other learned counsel, we deem it proper to hear the main
         matter involving challenge to the validity of the law enacted by
         Parliament and the notifications issued by the Central
         Government.
List the case on 13.3.2012. It is expected that on that day no
         request will be made for adjournment.
28
Till the matter is heard by the Court, the Monitoring
         Committee shall not order further sealing of the premises which
         are under its scrutiny.
We also direct that no construction, temporary or permanent,
         shall be made on the premises which have been subject matter of
         scrutiny of the Monitoring Committee and no order shall be
         passed by the Government or any authority regularising such
         construction or sanction the change of user.
            The Delhi Development Authority, New Delhi Municipal
         Corporation and Municipal Corporation of Delhi are directed to
         ensure that no encroachment is made on any public land,
         whether belonging to the Government or any public authority.
         They shall also ensure that no illegal construction is made on any
         of the properties which has been subject matter of scrutiny by the
         Monitoring Committee.
The Monitoring Committee shall be entitled to inspect the
         premises in which any illegal construction may have been made
         after this order or any encroachment on public land or
         regularisation and if necessary, submit report to this Court.
            Any person desirous of getting a copy of any report of the
         Monitoring Committee may make an application to the
         Monitoring committee and the required report be furnished to the
         applicant within a period of ten days on payment of usual
         charges.
It is also made clear that any party shall be free to file an
         appropriate application before the Monitoring Committee for its
         consideration and appropriate order.
IA Nos.2518-2521
            Shri M.N. Krishnamani, learned senior counsel appearing for
         the applicants state that in view of the developments which have
         taken place after the last order of the Court, the applications have
         become infructuous and the same may be disposed of as such.
            In view of the statement of learned senior counsel, IA
         Nos.2518-2521 are disposed of as infructuous. We hope and trust
         that the order passed by the Monitoring Committee will be
         implemented at the earliest.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)

     It was ordered that the Monitoring Committee shall do no further

sealing of the premises, which are under its scrutiny.              No construction,

temporary or permanent, shall be raised, which is the subject matter of the

scrutiny of the Monitoring Committee. No order shall be passed by the

Government or any authority regularizing such construction or sanction the
29
user's change.
28.   The order dated 30.04.2013 was passed regarding the misuse/non­

conforming use of the residential premises thus:
“3. The judgment in regard to the misuse/non-conforming use of
         residential premises, and power to seal premises, arising in IA
         No.22, as also, several appeals filed by the Municipal
         Corporation of Delhi (hereinafter referred to as ’MCD’) which
         arose out of a Full Bench of the Delhi High Court were decided
         by a judgment dated 16.2.2006 and is reported as, "
M.C. Mehta
         vs. Union of India
, (2006) 3 SCC 399". It was, inter alia, held
         that the MCD had power to seal the premises for non-
         conforming user in terms of Section 345 A of the MCD Act, and
         various directions were issued.
4. These cases relate to the matter of non-conforming user of
         premises, and the orders passed thereon, after the judgment of
         16.2.2006, under the special provisions made by the Parliament
         qua Delhi, the various provisions of the Master Plan which
         according to some of the petitioners were flawed because of the
         non-availability of the physical and social infrastructure.”
     Further, this Court observed with respect to authority or scope of the
Monitoring Committee and the purpose for which the Monitoring Committee
was appointed thus:
“8. (i) We had, as noticed above, by our order dated 24.3.2006,
         appointed the Monitoring Committee for looking into the aspect
         of sealing of premises, which were being put to the non-
         conforming user. The Monitoring Committee had ordered the
         sealing of those premises. Against which, a large number of the
         applicants have approached the Court (by filing writ petitions
         which were converted into IAs, or by filing IAs) praying for
         desealing. All the said IAs are still pending consideration before
         this Court. We propose to issue appropriate directions in the said
         IAs as well. …”
29.   On 6.12.2017, this Court reserved its orders on IA Nos.93010 and

93007 of 2017, which were decided on 15.12.2017.               In the order dated

6.12.2007, this Court considered the matter with respect to unauthorized

colonies, which came up as per reports dated 12.4.2016 and 30.10.2017.         It

was observed in the order that the power of the Monitoring Committee be
30
restored. While the order was reserved on the aforesaid date on IA No.93010

and 93007 of 2017, the relevant portion is extracted:
“1. Invaders have pillaged Delhi for hundreds of years, but for
               the last couple of decades it is being ravaged by its own citizens
               and officials governing the capital city – we refer to
               unauthorized constructions and misuse of residential premises
               for industrial and other commercial purposes. This Court has
               focussed on these illegal activities in several decisions and has
               issued directions from time to time to try and bring some sanity
               to urban living but to little or no effect. The applications before
               us, the chronology of events and the historical developments
               leading up to these applications has given cause to reflect and
               decide on some of these issues keeping our constitutional
               obligations in mind.
3. M.C. Mehta, an environmental activist, had already moved
               this Court with an application to find a remedy for the air
               pollution in Delhi in a pending writ petition. Although he sought
               several reliefs, this Court first concentrated on use of residential
               areas for industrial purposes and later, the misuse of residential
               premises for other commercial activities. For the present, we are
               concerned with the misuse of residential premises for other
               commercial activities. These issues first arose when preliminary
               orders were passed by this Court on his application on 30th
               September, 2002 and 19th August, 2003. Thereafter, this Court
               addressed the issue of residential areas being used for industrial
               purposes by a judgment and order dated 7th May, 2004 in
M.C.
               Mehta v. Union of India.2
***       ***        ***
10. Having passed orders on 7th May, 2004 relating to
               unauthorized industrial activity in Delhi and being compelled to
               set up a Monitoring Committee, this Court focused its attention
               on yet another problem facing the citizens of Delhi, namely, that
               of misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes. In the
               decision dated 16th February, 2006 in M.C. Mehta, this Court
               noted in paragraph 53 of the Report that it cannot remain a mute
               spectator when violations of the law affect the environment and
               the healthy living of those who abide by the law. It was stated,
               and the pain and anguish of this Court is quite apparent:
“Despite its difficulty, this Court cannot remain a
                    mute spectator when the violations also affect the
                    environment and healthy living of law-abiders. The
                    enormity of the problem which, to a great extent, is
                    the doing of the authorities themselves, does not mean
2
(2004) 6 SCC 588
31
that a beginning should not be made to set things
     right. If the entire misuser cannot be stopped at one
     point of time because of its extensive nature, then it
     has to be stopped in a phased manner, beginning with
     major violators. There has to be a will to do it. We
     have hereinbefore noted in brief the orders made in
     the last so many years but it seems the same has had
     no effect on the authorities. The things cannot be
     permitted to go on in this manner forever. On one
     hand, various laws are enacted, master plans are
     prepared by expert planners, provision is made in the
     plans also to tackle the problem of existing
     unauthorised constructions and misusers and, on the
     other hand, such illegal activities go on unabated
     openly under the gaze of everyone, without having
     any respect and regard for law and other citizens.”
     [Emphasis supplied by us].
11. This Court observed that if the laws are not enforced and
orders of the Courts to implement the laws are ignored, the result
can only be total lawlessness. In the decision rendered on 16th
February, 2006 this Court noted, quite explicitly and not in a
veiled manner, that blatant misuse of properties in Delhi for
commercial purposes on such a large-scale could not take place
without the connivance of the officers and that it was therefore
necessary to take action to check corruption, nepotism and total
apathy towards the rights of citizens – and we may add, chaos
and disaster. This Court noted that there must be some
accountability not only of those violating the law but also of
those errant officers who turn a blind eye to the misuse of
residential premises for commercial purposes. It was observed in
paragraph 61 of the Report as follows:
“Despite passing of the laws and repeated orders of
     the [Delhi] High Court and this Court, the
     enforcement of the laws and the implementations of
     the orders are utterly lacking. If the laws are not
     enforced and the orders of the courts to enforce and
     implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be
     total lawlessness. It is, therefore, necessary to also
     identify and take appropriate action against officers
     responsible for this state of affairs. Such blatant
     misuse of properties at large-scale cannot take place
     without connivance of the officers concerned. It is
     also a source of corruption. Therefore, action is also
     necessary to check corruption, nepotism and total
     apathy towards the rights of the citizens. Those who
32
own the properties that are misused have also implied
                     responsibility towards the hardship, inconvenience,
                     suffering caused to the residents of the locality and
                     injuries to third parties. It is, therefore, not only the
                     question of stopping the misuser but also making the
                     owners at default accountable for the injuries caused
                     to others. Similar would also be the accountability of
                     errant officers as well since, prima facie, such large-
                     scale misuser, in violation of laws, cannot take place
                     without the active connivance of the officers. It would
                     be for the officers to show what effective steps were
                     taken to stop the misuser.” [Emphasis supplied by us].
12. In view of the above, this Court directed the Delhi Municipal
               Corporation (for short the MCD) to give wide publicity in
               leading newspapers of the requirement that those misusing their
               residential premises for commercial purposes should cease the
               misuse on their own. It was also directed that 30 days after the
               issuance of the public notices, and if the misuse is not stopped,
               the process of sealing the premises would start. The period of 30
               days expired on or about 29th March, 2006.
13. Unfortunately, issuance of the public notices had no impact
               either on those violating the law or on those expected to
               implement the rule of law. Perhaps, as observed by this Court,
               the reason was connivance, corruption, nepotism and total apathy
               towards the rights of the citizens of Delhi - who are today facing
               the brunt of the decades of illegalities having been committed
14. Faced with this situation, in its decision of 24th March, 2006
               in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India3
this Court observed that the
               MCD had issued appropriate notices but, to oversee the
               implementation of the law regarding residential premises used
               for commercial (nonindustrial) purposes, it would be appropriate
               to seal offending premises. Therefore, rather than leave any
               discretion to the officers of the MCD (for obvious reasons) a
               Monitoring Committee was appointed consisting of Mr. K.J.
               Rao, Former Advisor to the Election Commissioner, Mr. Bhure
               Lal, Chairman, EPCA and Major General (Retd.) Som Jhingan.
               All necessary facilities to the members of the Monitoring
               Committee were directed to be provided by the MCD including
               facility of transport, secretarial services, honorarium etc.
               ***        *** ***
29. On 30th April, 2013 this Court passed a significant judgment
               and order in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India.4 This
decision related
3
W.P.(C) No.4677 of 1985
4
(2013) 16 SCC 336
33
to the challenge to the Act and subsequent legislations extending
               the provisions of the Act. A few directions were issued but two
               of them need particular mention: (i) All the writ petitions
               challenging the
Delhi Laws (Special Provisions) Act, 2006
(and
               subsequent legislations virtually extending the provisions of the
               Act) and I.As. connected therewith were transferred to the Delhi
               High Court with a request to hear the matters at an early date,
               preferably within one year from the date of receipt of the entire
               records and papers.
(ii) The order passed by this Court on 3rd
               January, 2012 in
M.C. Mehta v. Union of India
5 to the following
               effect would continue:
“Till the matter is heard by the Court, the Monitoring
                        Committee shall not order further sealing of the
                        premises which are under its scrutiny. We also direct
                        that no construction, temporary or permanent, shall be
                        made on the premises which have been the subject-
                        matter of scrutiny of the Monitoring Committee and
                        no order shall be passed by the Government or any
                        authority regularising such construction or sanction
                        the change of user.”
34. It seems to us that the applicants are keen to utilise the
               premises in question for residential purposes, as stated in their
               application. There is no apparent intention to utilise the premises
               in question for commercial purposes or for any purpose not
               permitted by law. That being the position, it would hardly serve
               any purpose if the applicants are required to formally file an
               appeal before the Appellate Tribunal which is apparently already
               dealing with a very large number of appeals. It would, therefore,
               be in the fitness of things to de-seal the premises in question for
               residential purposes subject to certain conditions.
Directions
35. In our opinion, as far as Infinity Knowledge Systems is
               concerned the following conditions would meet the ends of
               justice and also provide a safeguard against possible misuse of
               residential premises for commercial (nonindustrial) purposes:
(1) The applicants will file an affidavit before the
                        Monitoring Committee stating that they will use the
                        premises in question only for residential purposes and for
                        no other purpose whatsoever. The applicants will identify
                        the persons for whose residential use the premises in
                        question are sought to be desealed. Any change will be
5
(2012) 11 SCC 759
34
notified to the Monitoring Committee.
(2) The affidavit filed by the applicants will state the name,
     address and other particulars of the person who will be
     responsible for any misuse of the premises in question, that
     is, for use of the premises in question for any purpose other
     than residential.
(3) The person identified as the person responsible in terms
     of condition No.2 above will also file an affidavit clearly
     stating therein that he or she will ensure that the premises
     in question are used only for residential purposes and that
     in the event the premises in question are used for any
     purpose other than residential, the deponent would be liable
     for contempt of this Court.
(4) The applicants will file with the Monitoring Committee
     proof of payment of conversion charges to the statutory
     authority.
(5) The affidavits will be filed before the Monitoring
     Committee who may impose such other further conditions
     as may be appropriate.
36. In the event the Monitoring Committee is satisfied that the
premises in question ought to be de-sealed, it may require the
concerned statutory authority to de-seal the premises in question.
If the Monitoring Committee is not satisfied that the premises in
question ought to be desealed, the applicants will be at liberty to
approach this Court for appropriate orders. We make it clear that
in view of Report No. 46 dated 12th November, 2007 this Order
will not be applicable to all other commercial activities that have
been sealed in the premises in question.
37. We make it clear that henceforth it will not be necessary for
any person whose residential premises have been sealed for
misuse for any commercial (other than industrial) purposes at the
instance of the Monitoring Committee to file an appeal before
the appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal. Instead, that person
can directly approach the Monitoring Committee for relief after
depositing an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- with the Monitoring
Committee which will keep an account of the amounts received
by it. Any person who has already filed an appeal before the
appropriate statutory Appellate Tribunal but would prefer
approaching the Monitoring Committee may withdraw the
appeal and approach the Monitoring Committee for relief on the
above terms and conditions and on deposit of Rs.1,00,000/- as
costs with the Monitoring Committee, provided that the premises
were sealed at the instance of the Monitoring Committee. Any
challenge to the decision of the Monitoring Committee will lie to
this Court only. We are constrained and compelled to make this
35
order given the history of the case and the more than serious
         observations of this Court of an apparent nexus between some
         entities and the observations regarding corruption and nepotism.
38. We make it clear that this order will inure to the benefit of
         only those who are using residential premises for commercial
         purposes (nonindustrial) or for any other non-residential purpose
         and whose premises were sealed at the instance of the
         Monitoring Committee. This order will not at all inure for the
         benefit of anybody using residential premises for any industrial
         activity of any sort or nature whatsoever.
39. With regard to the writ petitions that have been transferred to
         the Delhi High Court which challenge the Act and subsequent
         legislations, we find from a perusal of the website of the Delhi
         High Court that these petitions have not yet been heard, for one
         reason or another. We do not find any fault with the Delhi High
         Court. The intention of this Court in transferring the writ
         petitions to the Delhi High Court was for their expeditious
         disposal preferably within one year. Almost four years have gone
         by in this exercise but without any decision. Therefore, given the
         gravity of the situation as revealed from the Reports of the
         Monitoring Committee, we think it appropriate that this Court
         ought to hear the writ petitions on an expeditious basis and,
         accordingly, withdraw the writ petitions that were transferred to
         the Delhi High Court to this Court. The Registry will place these
         writ petitions on receipt from the Delhi High Court for directions
         on 12th January, 2018.”

      The order clarifies that the Monitoring Committee was to look into the

misuse of residential premises for commercial purposes (non­industrial) or

any non­residential purpose.
30.   There is yet another order dated 24.4.2018 passed by this Court, thus:
“We have heard learned amicus curiae as well as learned
         Additional Solicitor General (Mr. Nadkarni) appearing for the
         Union of India, learned Additional Solicitor General (Mr.
         Maninder Singh) appearing for the DDA and learned counsel for
         Government of Delhi and other bodies.
Mr. K.C. Naik, Member Secretary and Officiating
         Chairman of the Central Ground Water Board is present. He has
         been requested to give us the status of ground water level in 20
36
points in Delhi from the year 2000 onwards every five years
including for the year 2017/2018 so that we are in a position to
understand whether there has been a depletion of ground water
and in which area and to what extent. This may be done in the
form of a chart as well as in the form of a Plan/graph/map.
It has been brought to our notice by learned amicus
curiae that an order was passed by this Court on 27th August,
2007 which is quoted in Report No.114 to the effect that
construction is being carried out in unauthorized colonies. This
has been possible because the building and other bye-laws do not
apply to these unauthorized colonies. Consequently,
unauthorized colonies are placed in a better position than
authorized colonies. It has been recorded by this Court in the
order dated 27th August, 2007 that unauthorized colonies cannot
be placed in a better position than authorized colonies.
In view of this situation, we direct that there should not be
any further construction in unauthorized colonies including on
public land beyond the existing building and other bye-laws.
Consequently, all building and construction activity in the
unauthorized colonies including on public land is stopped with
immediate effect beyond the existing building and other bye-
laws applicable to authorized colonies. The concerned authorities
will ensure compliance.
It has been submitted by learned Additional Solicitor
General (Mr. Nadkarni) that a Task Force is contemplated that
will ensure that the orders of this Court and the applicable bye-
laws are implemented and encroachments, etc. as well as
unauthorized constructions are removed.
The Task Force as suggested by learned Additional
Solicitor General (Mr. Nadkarni) may be constituted with
immediate effect.
As a first step, the Task Force should remove
encroachments on public roads, public streets and pedestrian
streets, as mentioned in the immediate action submitted by Mr.
Nadkarni in a Revised Note dated 18th April, 2018. The needful
should be done within a period of two weeks from today.
We make it clear that the Monitoring Committee may
suggest to the Task Force the areas where immediate action is
required to be taken.
It is stated by learned Additional Solicitor General (Mr.
Maninder Singh) that about 27.02 acres of public land has been
taken over by the Delhi Development Authority since 1st April,
2018. The details of this have not been mentioned. An affidavit
should be filed giving full details of the 27.02 acres of public
land that has been taken over by the Delhi Development
Authority from unauthorized encroachments.
List the matter on 15th May, 2018.”
37
(emphasis supplied)
31.   In compliance with the directions issued by this Court on 24.4.2018

for the constitution of the Special Task Force, an Office Memorandum dated

25.4.2018 was issued, which was not with respect to the conferral of powers

on the Monitoring Committee, but of the Special Task Force. The relevant

portion is extracted hereunder:
“In compliance of the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme
         Court dated 24.4.2018 given in the case of M.C. Mehta v. Union
         of India & Ors. (WP (Civil) 4677/1985), the following Action
         Plan was submitted in the hearing held on 15.5.2018 as intention
         and commitment to check all ongoing/ future unauthorized
         constructions, examination of specific complaints of
         unauthorized constructions in the part and to take action thereon
         and to weed out malpractices and corruption in the functioning
         of developmental and municipal bodies under over the overall
         supervision and coordination of the Special Task Force (STF)
         constituted vide OM dated 25-4-2018.
1. Plan of Action to ensure that no further illegal
         construction/ irregularity takes place in future
i) On the basis of territorial jurisdiction of the statutory
         authorities/ local bodies like Delhi Development Authority, New
         Delhi Municipal Council, South Delhi Municipal Corporation,
         North Delhi Municipal Corporation and East Delhi Municipal
         Corporation a Grid of officers has been prepared. This Grid
         would include the names, telephone numbers and emails of the
         concerned Executive Engineer / Equivalent Officer of respective
         zones of the various statutory authorities/ local bodies, who shall
         be held accountable for all future irregular and unauthorized
         constructions/ violations of the MPD-2021, the DMC Act, 1957
         and the Building Bye-Laws. The List of Officers included in the
         in the Grid is annexed which shall be uploaded on web-site
         being created separately for information of the general public
         and will be regularly updated by the concerned statutory
         authority from time to time, if any one gets transferred or
         changed.”
32.   It is apparent that the Monitoring Committee was authorized to take

care of the unauthorized colonies, and the Special Task Force was directed

to remove the encroachments from the public roads and public streets. This
38
Court considered Report No.114 and thereby had passed certain orders.
Report No.114 of 2018 is related to unauthorized constructions and

commercial activities in 1797 unauthorized colonies. Thus, the order of this

Court was confined to the unauthorized colonies and commercial activities

mentioned in the report as to encroachment on the public land.
33.   The order dated 8.5.2018 is with respect to the groundwater level, not

pertaining to the matter in question.        The order dated 15.5.2018 is with

respect to the Central Government to hear and decide the objections as to

Master Plan and the Special Task Force constituted under the
DDA Act
1957

was ordered to continue with their duties and responsibilities and action

plan submitted by the Attorney General was to be implemented by the

Special Task Force, not by the Monitoring Committee.
34.   In the order dated 24.5.2018, this Court issued the directions to the

statutory authorities to take appropriate action. With respect to illegal and

unauthorized structures, no direction was issued to the Monitoring

Committee. Following observations were made:
“14. We may mention that it has been recorded that Delhi is
         being ravaged by unauthorized encroachments and illegal
         constructions with impunity and none of the civic authorities
         including the Delhi Development Authority was sincerely
         carrying out its statutory duties. It is painful to require the
         issuance of directions to statutory authorities to carry out their
         mandatory functions in accordance with the law enacted by
         Parliament. Unfortunately, the situation in Delhi warranted such
         a direction due to the apathy of the civic authorities.”
35.   This Court considered Report No.127 on 24.8.2018 related to the

encroachment on the “public land” with respect to the construction at
39
Burari, Vishwas Nagar (EDMC), Kishangarh, South Zone (SDMC), the

encroachment of DDA land at Karkardooma Metro Station (EDMC) and

Bhatti Mines area of SDMC.
36.   The order dated 7.9.2018 has also been referred to in which following

facts have been noted.:
“2. Functioning of the Monitoring Committee
            It is stated that the Monitoring Committee is doing its best to
         comply with the orders passed by this Court and to ensure that
         there are no encroachments or unauthorized constructions or
         misuse of property in Delhi, but the Monitoring Committee is
         not getting adequate support from the executing agencies namely
         MCD, NDMC, DDA, and the Police. Therefore, there are
         existing constraints with the result that the Monitoring
         Committee has not been able to fully comply with the orders
         passed by this Court.
We request the Monitoring Committee to continue with its
         onerous task and we expect the statutory bodies (mentioned
         above) as well as the Police to render all necessary assistance to
         the Monitoring Committee in carrying out its task. If there are
         any specific complaints, these should be brought to the notice of
         this Court as has been done in the past.
Needless to say that any complaint made by the Monitoring
         Committee brought to the notice of this Court will be taken up
         with all due seriousness.”

      This Court has specifically noted in the aforesaid paragraph that the

Monitoring Committee is doing its best to remove the encroachments/

unauthorized constructions or misuse of the property, but that is related to

the encroachments on the public land and unauthorized colonies, and at no

point of time this Court has authorized the Monitoring Committee to take

action concerning residential premises which were standing on the private

land and were not being misused. The aforesaid observations are not with

respect to the Committee's authorization but have to be read in the context

of the purpose for which the Monitoring Committee had been appointed.
40
The power of the Monitoring Committee could not be said to be widened by

the aforesaid observations made in the order. This Court specifically dealt

with in several orders the questions relating to power and the purpose for

which the Monitoring Committee had been appointed.
37.   The learned Amicus invited the attention to the order dated

12.10.2018, in which this Court simply observed that the Monitoring

Committee should carry out its activities and responsibilities. The order is

quoted hereunder:
“The office report indicates that No Objection Certificate
          from Shri Ajay Kumar Singh has not yet been obtained. The
          alleged contemnor should file the No Objection Certificate in the
          Registry.
The additional affidavit be filed in this regard before the next
          date of hearing.
List the matter on 30th October, 2018.
It is made clear that the pendency of these proceedings should
          not deter the Monitoring Committee or any other authority from
          carrying out its activities and responsibilities.
             The alleged contemnor should remain present in Court on the
          next date of hearing.”
                                                            (emphasis supplied)
38.   In the order dated 5.12.2018, the court pointed out with respect to the

large number of complaints received by the Special Task Force and removal

of encroachments from the public land, thus:
“1.    Mr. Tarun Kapoor, the Vice Chairman of the DDA and the
      Chairman of the Special Task Force (STF) is present in the Court
      today.
The learned ASG, on taking instructions from him, says that
      while it is correct that regular reports have not been filed in terms of
      the orders passed by this Court, fortnightly report will henceforth be
      filed without fail by the STF.
It is further stated that the STF has received a very large
      number of complaints exceeding 7000 and it has become quite
      difficult to deal with all these complaints. So far about 3,400
      complaints have been dealt with.
41
In view of the large number of complaints, efforts are being
      made to recruit additional staff. It is stated by Mr. Kapoor that
      additional staff will be recruited within 15 days or so or in any case
      before 31.12.2018.
We expect the STF to expeditiously deal with all these
      complaints and take appropriate action wherever necessary. This may
      be done in a time bound manner.
We may note that the fact that the STF has received more than
      7000 complaints indicates the magnitude of the problem of
      encroachments and unauthorized construction in Delhi.
2. A consolidated report of the actions taken on the recommendations
      of the Special Task Force has been shown to us today.
On perusal of the report, we find that the total area cleared
      from encroachment by the STF under permanent structures is as high
      as 10,71,838 sq mts. The area under temporary structures that has
      been cleared from encroachment is 16,99,858 sq mts. In addition,
      about 3,202 sq mts of roads / streets / footpaths have been cleared on
      both sides. This confirms the severe problems being faced by Delhi
      due to unauthorized construction and encroachments and the
      magnitude of the problem.
3.     In view of the huge amount of land that has been retrieved by
      the Municipal Corporations under the directions of the STF, it is
      necessary to preserve and protect the lands so that there is no
      encroachment upon it once again.
Since the Commissioners of the Municipal Corporations are
      part of the STF, we would require the STF to look into the matter
      with due seriousness and protect and preserve the land that has been
      taken possession/retrieved from the unauthorized encroachments.
      Needless to say, this also includes the roads/streets/footpaths that
      have been cleared by the STF with the assistance of the Municipal
      Corporations.”
39.   Learned Amicus relied upon order dated 14.1.2019. The relevant

portion is extracted hereunder:
“….The Monitoring Committee, along with the Deputy
          Commissioner, Nazafgarh Zone, SDMC, inspected the area
          behind Sector 7 Dwarka Sub-city on 30.10.2018 and noticed
          major unauthorised constructions in the amalgamated plots
          wherein huge showrooms, restaurants, Gyms etc. were found to
          be in operation. The Deputy Commissioner, Nazafgarh Zone,
          SDMC, were immediately directed to issue show cause notice to
          all the violators in respect of unauthorised constructions and
          misuse.
Let the SDMC explain as to why they have not taken any
42
action under the provisions of
DMC Act
for unauthorised
         constructions and as to why the responsibility of taking action
         has to be fastened only to Revenue Department, District
         Magistrate and SDM. The needful be done within three weeks
         from today.
Let the Revenue Department also explain its stand on the
         action taken on the unauthorised constructions pursuant to the
         observations made by the Committee and the directions issued in
         respect of the plots vested in Sector 7 at Dwarka Sub-city. ….”

      It is apparent that in the order dated 14.1.2019, this Court has noted

that construction of showrooms, restaurants, gyms that was for the

“commercial purpose” and notice was issued in respect of “unauthorized

constructions and misuse of the residential area”.
40.   Learned Amicus referred to the order dated 31.7.2001 passed in Writ

Petition (C) No.27 of 1994. The relevant portion is extracted hereunder:
“52.       ….The perusal of the affidavits further shows that the
         parties concerned have not even touched the tip of the iceberg as
         far as demolition of unauthorised constructions is concerned.
         The number of unauthorised constructions which are said to have
         been demolished are a small fraction of what is required to be
         done. It is quote evident that there is now no fear of the law
         catching up at least with those persons who do not believe in
         adhering to following the rules and regulations laid down with
         respect to construction of property. Unauthorised encroachment
         and illegal construction even as per the affidavits are increasing.
         It is dangerous trend if the people do not have either respect for
         or fear of law primarily due to non-enforcement of the law. It is
         something which causes us some concern and it would be
         appropriate if serious thought is given to this aspect at the higher
         quarters…….
53.        …. On one hand, various laws are enacted, master
         plans are prepared by expert planners, provision is made in the
         plans also to tackle the problems of existing unauthorised
         constructions and misusers and on the other hand, such illegal
         activities go on unabated openly under the gaze of everyone,
         without having any respect and regard for law and other
         citizens…..
61.       ……Despite passing of the laws and repeated orders of
43
the High Court and this Court, the enforcement of the laws and
          the implementation of the orders are utterly lacking. If the law
          are not enforced and the orders of the courts to enforce and
          implement the laws are ignored, the result can only be total
          lawlessness. It is, therefore, necessary to also identify and take
          appropriate action against officers responsible for this state of
          affairs. Such blatant misuse of properties at large scale cannot
          take place without connivance of the concerned officers. It is
          also a source of corruption…. ”
41.   In the order reported in (2004) 6 SCC 588 in this case, this Court

considered the question of regularization of illegal industrial activities in the

context of a violation of Master Plan and industrial activities in residential

non­conforming areas of Delhi. Requisite directions were issued for closure

or relocation of industrial units non­confirming with the ecological balance

considering the right of a hygienic, clean and safe environment.               The

decision is not relevant with respect to the power and authority of the

Monitoring Committee to act.
42.   It is pertinent to mention here that earlier this Court in the same

matter passed an order reported in (2013) 16 SCC 336 whereby sent all the

matters from Supreme Court to the High Court. Since in the High Court, the

progress was slow, later on, vide order dated 15.12.2017, this Court called

all the matters back to this Court.
43.   No doubt about it that matter of encroachment is a matter of concern,

but the Monitoring Committee can act within the four corners of powers

conferred upon it and purpose for which the court appointed the Monitoring

Committee. It cannot exceed its powers and take any action beyond its

authorization by the court.
44
44.   We have gone through the various reports referred to by the learned

Amicus Curiae and other learned counsel concerning sealing. They reflect

the following position:
REPORT NO.1
45.   Report No.1 dated 13.4.2006 submitted by the Monitoring Committee,

is captioned under Para 1, which is extracted hereunder:
“PRELIMINARY REPORT OF THE MONITORING
           COMMITTEE FOR SEALING OF COMMERCIAL
           ESTABLISHMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL PREMISES
1. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India vide its order dated 24 th
              March 2006 had appointed a Monitoring Committee
              comprising of Sh.K.J. Rao, Former Advisor to Election
              Commission, Sh. Bhure Lal, Chairman, E.P.C.A. and Maj.
General (Retd.) Som Jhingon, Kirti Chakra, VSM to monitor
              the sealing of commercial establishments in residential
              premises in Delhi. The Municipal Corporation of Delhi
              (MCD) had informed the members of their appointment as
              Members of the Monitoring Committee on 28th/30th March,
              2006. Sh. Bhure Lal & Sh. K.J. Rao took charge of office on
              29th March 2006 and had a meeting with the officers of the
              Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Senior Advocates of
              MCD.”

REPORT NO.2
46.   In   Report    No.2   dated    6.5.2006    submitted    by   the   Monitoring

Committee, is captioned as under:
“REPORT NO.2 OF THE MONITORING COMMITTEE
           FOR SEALING OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS
           IN RESIDENTIAL PREMISES”

      The Report is with respect to the sealing of commercial establishments

in residential premises.      Certain suggestions were made with respect to

roads measuring 80 ft. wide and above, mixed land use and payment of
45
conversion charges, zonal plans, parking, vacant commercial units built by

Delhi Development Authority, and Banquet halls. Following is the Executive

Summary of the Report:
“EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
20.      Taking into consideration the above factual position,
         the Monitoring Committee recommends the Hon’ble Supreme
         Court kindly to consider to direct:
a. The MCD to recover from the beneficiaries, where mixed
             land use has been allowed, the conversion and parking
             charges together with interest thereon from the date of the
             notification allowing mixed land use of the premises
             besides revising the conversion charged fixed by the MCD
             in 1992.
b. The MCD to ensure that Front Setbacks are surrendered by
             the beneficiaries of mixed land use streets, as laid down in
             Clause 8(4) of the Master Plan 2001.
c. The MCD to complete the sealing operations in respect of
             identified roads having width of 80 ft & above and to take
             up thereafter the sealing operations in respect of roads
             having width of 60 ft. & above after giving a Public Notice,
             as has been done in the case of roads of 80 ft width and
             above.
d. The Ministry of Urban Development – Govt. of India to
             approve and notify the draft Zonal Plans already prepared
             and pending with the DDA in respect of the remaining nine
             zones wherein mixed land use roads have already been
             identified for which not more than 15 days time is required.
             Simultaneously the work regarding the survey and
             preparation of Draft Zonal Plans in accordance with the
             Master Plan 221 may continue.
e. The Ministry of Urban Development – Govt. of India to
             modify its Notification dated 28th March 2006 based on the
             suggestions given by the Committee in paras 17, 18 & 19
             above.
f.      Govt. of NCT of Delhi and all the local bodies to ensure
               the implementation of the parking policy.”

REPORT NO.3
47.   Report No.3 dated 23.5.2006 is again for sealing the “commercial
46
establishments in the residential premises”.       It has the reference with

respect to the commercial establishments carrying out commercial activities

at their premises.    It also has a reference to the
Delhi Laws (Special

Provisions) Act, 2006
. Some explanations are also in the report concerning

the de­sealing of commercial establishments.
REPORT NO.4
48.   Report No.4 dated 24.5.2006 is again CAPTION as Report No.1. The

report is concerning the “commercial establishments” as mentioned in Para

2   such   as   automobile   showrooms,    Automobile   workshops,    Branded

showrooms, call centers, coaching institutes, business offices, building

materials, go­downs, tent houses, guest houses, jewellery shops, restaurants

and iron and steel shops. The report has a mention of “small shops”, which

deals with private activities in “residential areas” such as Vegetable/ fruits/

flowers, bakery items, kirana, stationery, cybercafé, barber shop, chemist

shops, etc. The report further states about “prohibited commercial activities

in residential areas," such as banquet halls, storage, go­downs, junk shops,

liquor shops, printing, dyeing, and varnishing, etc.
49.   Bistro Village is situated at Hauz Khas. In para 17, it is mentioned

that it is an urban village where permitted land use for the area is

residential, and no commercial activity within the village can be permitted. It

was observed that a major part of the village is full of commercial activities,

even though no commercial activity was permitted in Hauz Khaz village,

which is a residential area. The report also mentions commercial activities

in unauthorized colonies like Madhu Vihar, where area earmarked for a
47
Community Centre, Health Centre, and other community facilities has

encroached. The report was relating to “commercial use in the residential

premises”. It was also mentioned that there is an encroachment of the

monument on public land.
REPORT NO.5
50.   Report No.5 dated 20.9.2006 CAPTION as Report No.1, following facts

have been mentioned:
“9. Commercial Activity in Unauthorised Colonies on
         Encroached Public Land – Madhu Vihar: In Its Report No. 4,
         the Monitoring Committee reported to the Hon’ble Supreme
         Court regarding commercial establishments on encroached
         public land in many unauthorized colonies pending
         regularization. Examples of Madhu Vihar and New Ashok Nagar
         were given in the said Report. The photographs enclosed as
         Annexure ‘E' with the said Report clearly show the extent of
         commercial activities on the encroached public land even on the
         roads of 80’ and above in Madhu Vihar. The Monitoring
         Committee visited Madhu Vihar on 19th September 2006 and
         noticed that in the entire colony commercial activities have
         almost been stopped and hectic activities going on for
         conversion of those places as residential houses. The entire
         commercial area has again been photographed. The photographs
         now taken on 19th September 2006 are enclosed. Development
         Notification, dated 7th September, 2006, the Government of NCT
         of Delhi had notified such streets/stretches (Number not Indi-
         cated) by way of a Notification No.149, dated 15th September,
         2006. It had further been stated that the Government of India and
         the Government of NCT of Delhi have enacted the notifications
         under the powers conferred to them under the
DDA Act
and that
         they are valid and constitutional. The Commissioner MCD con-
cluded that “what amounted to mis-user prior to the above Noti-
         fications cannot be termed as mis-user at the present point of
         time to the extent provided for in the Notifications. The Hon'ble
         Supreme court of India has directed the MCD to take sealing ac-
         tion ln case of mis-user. Thus, to the extent mis-user continues
         after the above Notifications, the same will be sealed as per the
         directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court”. A copy of the Note of
         the Commissioner, MCD is enclosed herewith and marked as
         Annexure ‘C'.
48
6. As the Notification No.149, dated 15th September, 2006 re-
ferred to in the Note of the Commissioner, MCD had not been
received by the Monitoring Committee till 11 A.M. on 18th Sep-
tember, 2006, a letter was sent to the MCD for a copy of the
same. The Commissioner MCD informed the Monitoring Com-
mittee to say that they had received only the first eight pages of
the Notification and that the full text of the Notification would
be available only by the evening of 18th September, 2006. A copy
of the Notification, dated 15th September, 2006, has finally been
received by the Monitoring Committee at 6 P.M. on 19 th Septem-
ber, 2006.
7. The Monitoring Committee would submit to the Hon’ble
Supreme Court that the rationale and the stand taken by the
MCD on sealing operations Vide its Note, dated 16 th September,
2006 is different from the stand earlier taken by it on the 15 th
September, 2006, in the meeting of the Monitoring Committee
with the Commissioner and other officers of the MCD, which is
somewhat surprising. The Monitoring Committee further submits
that as per the sealing programmes received from the MCD, the
sealing operations are being done by the MCD as per the stand
taken by it in its Note, dated 16 th September, 2006. Accordingly,
sealing operations are being done in areas/roads which herewith
and collectively marked as Annexure ‘D’. A comparison of
these two sets of photographs show the extent of change of face
of the commercial area. The Monitoring Committee brings it to
the notice of the Hon'ble Court that any building having com-
mercial activity on any encroachment of 'public property is not
eligible for regularization. Para 1.1 (b) of the Revised Guidelines
for regularization of unauthorized colonies as framed by the
Govt. of NCT Delhi provides that colonies /parts of 'colonies
which pose hindrances in the provision of infrastructure facilities
would not be considered for regularization. As already men-
tioned in its Report No. 4 the Monitoring Committee had
brought to the kind notice of the Hon’ble Supreme Court that as
per the zonal plan entire encroached area is meant for develop-
ment as Community Center, Medical Center and Public Utility
facilities. Further para 1.1(d) of the said guidelines provides that
no regularization will be done in respect of the buildings used for
commercial purposes except for petty shops upto 50 sqm. DDA
has not taken cognizance of these violations on encroached pub-
lic land. In view of the foregoing, the Monitoring committee reit-
erates its recommendations to the Hon’ble Supreme Court to di-
rect the DDA to take immediate action, in a phased manner, to
demolish all such buildings having commercial activities on en-
croached public land in all colonies in Delhi.”
49
REPORT NO.6
51.   In Report No.6 dated 22.9.2006 by the Monitoring Committee, the

following facts have been mentioned:
“3. The Monitoring Committee, in addition, would like to bring
         it to the kind notice of the Hon’ble Court that despite clear
         instructions from the Monitoring Committee to carry out the
         sealings colony-wise instead of road-to-road basis, in respect of
         prohibited activities in residential areas, the MCD had issued
         contrary orders to the Sealing Teams of various zones to carry
         out the sealings in parts in various colonies in the zone without
         completing the work in a particular colony at a time. The
         reasons and the rationale for this changed action not in
         consonance with the directions of the Monitoring Committee are
         not known.”

REPORT NO.7
52.   In Report No.7 dated 27.9.2006 the CAPTION remains the same as

Report No.1, the following facts have been mentioned:
“1. The Monitoring Committee has, in its Report No.4
         recommended the perception of a small shop, in which 19
         commercial activities have been mentioned. The Monitoring
         Committee has inadvertently omitted the following activities
         which may kindly be considered for inclusion in the said list:-
a. Cable TV/ DTH operations;
b. Hosiery/ Readymade Garments/ Cloth Shops;
         c. ATM;
1.1         The Monitoring Committee further recommends that
         the Hon’ble Court may kindly consider to fix a date before
         which the owners of the small shops should get themselves
         registered after depositing the conversion charges and getting the
         Building Plans revised.
2. Similarly, the Hon’ble Court may kindly consider to fix a date
         before which owners of the shops under mixed land use/
         commercial use get themselves registered after depositing the
         conversion charges and getting the Building Plans revised.”

REPORT NO.8
53.   In Report No.8 dated 17.10.2006, the ‘CAPTION’ remains the same as
50
Report No.1.     The report states meeting with the Commissioner of Police,

Delhi, and sealing programme in unauthorized colonies.

REPORT NO.16
54.    Report No.16 dated 23.11.2006 is regarding the sealing of “CTC Plaza”

at Kilokhri, Ring Road. It is a “branded showroom” of diamond jewellery,

sarees, costumes, readymade garments, etc. It has been used for commercial

activity.
REPORT NO.31
55.    In Report No.31 dated 2.3.2007 ‘CAPTION’ is the same as Report No.1,

the following facts have been mentioned by the Monitoring Committee:
“2. The Monitoring Committee brings it to the kind notice of the
            Hon’ble Supreme Court that following establishments are not
            covered by the Master Plan 2021:
(a) Commercial activities on encroached public land;
(b) Commercial activities on floors other than ground floor in
            notified Mixed Land Use Roads/ Pedestrian Roads;
(c) Prohibited commercial activities in residential and Mixed
            land use areas mentioned in para 15.6.2 of Master Plan Delhi-
            2021;
(d) Commercial activities in basements in residential areas;
(e) Commercial establishments on roads other than the 2183
            roads notified as Mixed Land Use or Commercial or Pedestrian
            roads by Notifications dated 7th September and 15th September
            2006 for which no protection is extended (however 90 days time
            has been provided in the Master Plan-2021 for survey and to
            notify additional roads further to 2183 roads);
(f) Specific Commercial establishments / properties mentioned in
            the judgment dated 16th February 2006 of the Hon’ble Supreme
            Court (While disposing of the Civil Appeals, Interlocutory
            Applications (other than IA 22) and Special Leave Petitions in
            the matter, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has, in its Judgement
            dated 16th February, 2006, directed that in case misuser is not
            stopped in the premises involved in the Civil Appeals and
            Special Leave Petitions, subject to what had been stated in the
            Judgement, the MCD would take immediate steps to seal those
            premises soon after expiry of 30 days). The MCD has been
            requested to furnish a list of such properties which have to be
51
sealed in terms of this order). Specific properties mentioned in
          the Report No.4 dated 14th September 2006 of the Monitoring
          Committee (commercial establishments on encroached public
          land meant for public utility services), as per directions of the
          Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 29th September 2006.”

REPORT NO.34
56.   Report No.34 dated 9.4.2017 ‘CAPTION’ is as Report No.1.                Non­

availability of the police force was required to carry out sealing operation in

the Report.
REPORT NO.38
57.   In Report No.38 dated 21.7.2007, the ‘CAPTION’ is as Report No.1.

The report is with respect to the “Mixed­Use Regulations” and “Special Area

Regulations” as per the MPD­2021.         Regulation No.16.2 of the MPD­2021

was referred to in the report. It was also pointed out that there should be

“one shop on one plot in the residential areas”. The detail of the registration

was given for small shops, professionals, commercial and other activities in

the residential areas. Concerning conversion charges for mixed land use,

certain suggestions were made. The report also contains the detail of the

encroachment made on the public land. The report also contains in detail

the   provisions   of   the   MPD­2021        and   regarding   “regularization   of

unauthorized colonies” on “encroached public land” of “Gram Sabha”,

acquired land, “DDA land”, “MCD land”, “Forest land”, etc. It was pointed

out that total encroachments on public land is “26,830 Bigha 17 Biswas”.

“Unauthorized colonies which have come up on the public land” were having

“commercial activities” also.
REPORT NO.43
52
58.     Report No.43 dated 5.10.2007 ‘CAPTION’ is the same as in Report

No.1.    It is apparent from the entire Report No.43 that it was concerning

payment     of   conversion   charges    for   small    shops,   “mixed    use”   and

“commercial activities” registered. The report further states regarding go­

downs in rural areas and “encroachment” of Raj Vidya Kender upon the

“public land”.
REPORT NO.46
59.     Report No.46 dated 12.11.2007 was filed concerning IAs regarding

sealing of premises of the ICICI ‘Bank’ Limited at New Friends Colony,

various “business schools and institutions, physiotherapy and wellness

centers/hotels at the Kailash Colony” area where “residential premises have

been used for the commercial activities”.
REPORT NO.47
60.     Report No.47 dated 5.12.2007 was submitted concerning various IAs

filed in this Court with respect to sealed premises of Small Shops Traders

Welfare Association.        The Monitoring Committee observed concerning

Vidhata Estates Private Limited that it was running “commercial activities in

building." The Monitoring Committee observed as under:
“In view of the foregoing, the Monitoring Committee submits
           that the applicant, who is running commercial activities in a
           building on a part of the plot abutting a non-notified road, with
           unauthorized constructions and having no legal access to the
           notified road, is not entitled to any relief in the matter.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
61.     Some hotels, guest houses, other commercial premises, business

schools, etc. were also mentioned. “None of the items” is for “purely

residential premises”. The Monitoring Committee further observed:
53
“The MCD has already been informed by the Monitoring
         Committee that industrial units in residential areas do not fall
         under its purview and the same may be sealed or de-sealed as per
         the directions of the Monitoring Committee constituted by the
         Hon’ble Supreme Court for the purpose.”

REPORT NO.75
62.   Report No.75 dated 1.1.2020 is concerning the “commercial activities”

and unauthorized construction by “Reebok Showroom”, “Hotel” West End

Inn, Central Plaza, NH 8, and “Rangapuri” Extension.
63.   Concerning ensuring the implementation of the Master Plan of Delhi,

2021 (MPD­2021), in its true spirit, all “commercial activities in residential

premises” are identified and removed. Following facets have been mentioned

by the Monitoring Committee in its Report:
“2. SPECIAL SUBMISSION OF THE MONITORING
         COMMITTEE
            The Monitoring Committee submits that the Committee has
         been appointed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court to ensure
         implementation of its orders in the matter after taking into
         consideration large scale commercialization of residential
         premises. By various orders, the Hon’ble Supreme Court laid
         down the guidelines and also ensured that the Government
         brought out the Master Plan of Delhi, 2021. The Monitoring
         Committee has tried to ensure the implementation of MPD-2021
         in its true spirit by ensuring that all commercial activities in
         residential premises are identified and removed. Some important
         facets are:
1. Admissibility of only one small shop on a plot in residential
            premises
2. Re-survey of classified roads. Many roads which do not
            qualify to be notified either as MLU/ Commercial Road even
            as per the MCD survey, have not been de-notified despite the
            assurance given by the MCED to the Hon’ble Supreme Court
            and several reminders by the Monitoring Committee. In one
            case a single property in A & B Colony (A-4 Sarvodaya
            Enclave) has been clubbed with E&F Colony and notified as
            commercial road in blatant violation of the MPD-2021, by an
            amendment to the Notification dated 15th Sept 2006).
54
3. Commercialization in Rural & Urban Villages.
4. Encroachment of public land by the traders.
5. Non sealing of commercial activities in non-permissible
            premises like D-1, D-1A & D-18, Green Park Min Market,
            Jahaz Mahal (Mehrauli) Shiva Market in a DDA Pak in
            Rohini Zone etc.
6. Parking & free circulation on commercial roads.
7. Breaking of seals in more than 70 reported cases in just two
            Zones of MCD, in which action has not been initiated for
            contempt of court proceedings.”

REPORT NO.85
64.   In Report No.85 dated 4.4.2011, ‘CAPTION’ is the same as in Report

No.1. A complaint was made by the Monitoring Committee as to the order of

the Lt. Governor of Delhi for “de­sealing” some of the establishments under

“commercial/ mixed land use” in violation of orders of this Court. The details

of “construction on public land” by Dr. Lal Path Labs, 54, Hanuman Road,

and encroachment on public land, unauthorized construction, and misuse of

“shops/flats in Khan Market” area was concerned.

REPORT NO.103
65.   In Report No.103 dated 12.4.2016, it was pointed out that pursuant to

remitting the cases by this Court to the Delhi High Court, various difficulties

in the implementation of the order were pointed out. The details were given

with respect to the hearing of the cases by the Delhi High Court and

progress on disposal of appeals before the Tribunals. The details of de­

sealing of properties in the unauthorized colony, village & abadi area

(including urban villages constructed on public land) were given. The details

were given about the refusal of the Standing Committee of the erstwhile

MCD to de­notify 140 Roads in Shahdara North, Rohini, Central, South, and

West Zones resurveyed. Violations of the orders dated 3.1.2012 and
55
30.4.2013 by various commercial establishments were pointed out and other

facts regarding interference of Lt. Governor of Delhi in the sealing matter of

Dr. Lal Path Labs Pvt. Ltd. etc.             and unauthorized construction on

Government and public land were given thus:
“The Monitoring Committee would submit to the Hon’ble Court
         that the Municipal Authorities, NDMC and DDA are lax in the
         performance of their duty with respect to unauthorised
         construction and encroachment on public/ govt. land. The public
         at large is violating the laid down orders i.e. Building Bye Laws
         and Master Plan etc. The fear factor with respect to the punitive
         action by the Authorities is totally missing from the public mind
         thereby creating a chaotic situation on the ground in whole of
         Delhi. The officers concerned are not performing there assigned
         duties. The DDA has not been able to safe guard/ protect its land
         and there is rampant encroachment. The DDA must as a policy
         make a boundary wall to protect the land from any type of
         encroachment and also carry out regular inspection of their land
         holdings.”

REPORT NO.104
66.   Report No.104 dated 30.10.2017 deals with the “conversion charges”

regarding “mixed use land”, de­notification of 140 roads, “unauthorized

construction” on “public and Government land” and “unauthorized colonies

were being constructed by way of encroachments in the Government land”.
The Report further states regarding violations by commercial establishments

like Delhi Cloth Mills and other institutions where “commercial shops” were

built and regarding Ambassador “Hotel” etc.

REPORT NO.106
67.   In Report No.106 dated 10.1.2018 submitted by the Monitoring

Committee, public land use was acquired where unauthorized structures

were raised. The Monitoring Committee has mentioned the following facts:
“The Monitoring Committee has finalized its plan to carry out
56
the assigned task of sealing the unauthorized structures, eradicate
         misuse and remove encroachment on DDA/ Government land
         and making the public aware of the seriousness of their crime for
         any illegal act in this process. Retrieval of DDA land and Forest
         land is the priority task set by the Monitoring Committee.”

REPORT NO.111
68.   In Report No.111 dated 7.2.2018 concerning E­5A, Hauz Khaz Market,

New Delhi, it was submitted that the same falls under Shops­cum­

Residential use, not as a Local Shopping Centre. The Report was regarding

“use of basement for professional activities in residential premises”. It

further dealt with the “encroachments on the public land” and submits that

the “commercial activities are not permitted in the converted shops cum

residence”.
REPORT NO.112
69.   Report No.112 dated 9.2.2018 of the Monitoring Committee is

concerning large scale “commercial activities in the residential premises” at

Shahdara, South Zone.
REPORT NO.114
70.   Report No.114 dated 3.4.2018 is concerning the construction of

unauthorized colonies on Gram Sabha land, acquired land, DDA land, and

MCD land. It was submitted that no regularization could be done in respect

of residential premises used for non­residential purposes.

REPORT NO.118
71.   Report No.118 dated 7.5.2018 concerns the “Khan Market” where

“verandahs were encroached and amalgamated in the shops” causing

hardship to the visitors in the market. The report further states regarding
57
encroachment of DDA land at Sanjay Market, Mangolpur Kalan in Rohini

Zone and misuse of premises for commercial activities

REPORT NO.119
72.   Report No.119 dated 24.5.2018 is regarding the slow progress of the

“sealing operations” in Lajpat Nagar­IV and Amar Colony­Refugee Colony,

where large scale “encroachments” were made by owners/ occupants on the

“Government land”.
REPORT NO.120
73.   Report No.120 dated 11.6.2018, again referred to this Court’s order

dated 29.9.2006 regarding “conversion of residential user into commercial”

user except with the leave of this Court.
It was observed that the Government's obligation was to ensure

compliance of the order of this Court, and the Special Task Force and the

Monitoring Committee were directed to continue with its duties and

responsibilities.
REPORT NO.121
74.   Report No.121 dated 13.6.2018 was concerning “non­cooperation” of

the local bodies with the Sealing Officer, where after inspection, it was found

that certain “rooftops” were being used as “pubs” and “dance floors” after

clubbing the plots illegally.
REPORT NO.124
75.   In Report No.124 dated 4.7.2018 again, a complaint was made relating

to “non­cooperation” of authorities in the sealing process as the Master Plan
58
(MPD­2021) was under consideration.
REPORT NO.125
76.   Report No.125 dated 31.7.2018 is concerning the constitution of the

Special Task Force. It was pointed out that there was “non­cooperation” by

the “Special Task Force”. Details were mentioned about sealing action at

Amar Colony, Lajpat Nagar, where the “tenements” built by the Government

for residential purposes only were allotted to refugees in various colonies in

Delhi on a lease basis. Most of them were used for “commercial activities by

raising unauthorized construction” on the Government and common land.

Details about the roads were also given.
REPORT NO.127
77.   Report   No.127   dated 20.8.2018       was again concerning     illegal/

unauthorized construction. With respect to “Burari Area” (North MCD) the

report was submitted that the area was vandalized and huge unauthorized

construction has come up. Concerning “Vishwas Nagar” (EDMC), report was

relating to “residential premises being used as Go­downs” and storing places

for “prohibited industries,". In Kishangarh area at South Zone, large scale

unauthorized   construction   was   reported    on   DDA   land   by   way   of

encroachment. Similarly, the encroachment on DDA land at Karkardooma

Metro Station was pointed out.             At Bhatti Mines area of SDMC,

“encroachment of Revenue/Forest land” was pointed out.




REPORT NO.128
78.   In Report No.128 dated 5.9.2018 suggestions were made regarding
59
permanent de­sealing norms.         Dubious deviations regarding misuse of

unauthorized constructions were pointed out. “Unauthorized constructions”

were being raised in unauthorized colonies on the “public land”. Details were

given about “encroachment on the DDA land”.
REPORT NO.129
79.   In Report No.129 dated 18.9.2018 report was furnished regarding

illegal dairy running at Gokulpur, which was sealed but the seal was

tampered.
REPORT NO.131
80.   Report No.131 dated 8.10.2018 is related to the “contempt notice”

issued by this Court to one of the Members of Parliament.

REPORT NO.134
81.   Report No.134 was submitted concerning the “Motels/ Farm Houses”

who have constructed “pandals, shamianas, sheds," etc. in their plots. Order

dated 12.10.2018 of this Court was also stated which is extracted

hereunder:
“…….As an interim measure, we direct that the basement of the
         premises in question shall remain sealed until further orders.
         Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf
         of the applicant says that no pandal will be constructed on the
         premises in question. In view of this undertaking, the seal on the
         premises may be opened. The Monitoring Committee as well as
         the South Delhi Municipal Corporation should give their report
         within ten days.
The applicant may respond to these reports within four days
         thereafter.”
82.   Certain violations of MPD­2021 were also pointed out to be complied

with by the concerned authorities.
REPORT NO.144
60
83.   Report No.144 dated 11.12.2018 is in respect of the “cases pending”

before the “High Court of Delhi” regarding property situated at 22A, Janpath.

The report was submitted regarding “change of the land” used for

“residential purposes as commercial” and the residential premises were used

to run a chemist shop.        Similarly, other cases were also pointed out.

Regarding the 20 Point Programme (TPP) certain “allotments” of plots were

made for the “residential purpose” but they were being used for the

“commercial activities”. Showrooms, Restaurants, Gyms, etc. were reported

to be in operation on those plots. The report further states with respect to

Singla Sweets (commercial) at Madhu Vihar and Vanasthali Public School,

which were constructed on public and acquired land.
84.   The order dated 7.5.2019 was pointed out time and again by the

learned counsel for the parties.        On 7.5.219 this Court directed the

Monitoring Committee as under:
“Heard Mr. Ranjit Kumar, learned senior counsel and Amicus
         Curiae, and the learned senior counsel appearing on both the
         sides.
I.A.No. 61593/2019 and 61594/2019

                A question has been raised whether the Committee has the
         jurisdiction to decide about the premises which have been
         erected for residential purposes only and are not being used for
         commercial purposes and the buildings have not been erected
         and used for industrial purposes. Question is also raised whether
         the Committee has been empowered to take care of unauthorised
         construction, when they are purely for residential purpose.
We request the Committee to send its opinion whether in
         the past, it has exercised its power and jurisdiction where the
         premises are only constructed and are used as residential one and
         there is an allegation of raising unauthorised construction or
         some deviation has been made in the existing structure. We
61
request the Committee to furnish its considered opinion in this
          regard before this Court.
***        ***     ***
                   It was also submitted that as per the provisions contained
          in
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957
and
Delhi
          Development Act, 1957
, notification was issued by the DDA on
          22.03.2016. Chapter 1 contains the provision of regularisation.
Paragraph 2.27 is extracted hereunder :-
“2.27 Any building or part thereof constructed
                unauthorisedly with or without obtaining the
                Sanction/Completion       Certificate     communicated
                thereof by a written intimation/undertaking can be
                regularised, if the same is within the ambit of BBL
                and MPD provisions by paying requisite fees and
                charges as per Annexure IV.”
                  It was also submitted that the construction is in
          accordance with the Master Plan and is in low density residential
          area. Whether it is a case of deviation or wholly unauthorised
          construction in view of the report of measurement, may also be
          gone into by the Committee and thereafter, the matter may be
          decided in an objective manner, whether it can be compounded
          or not in accordance with the aforesaid provisions. Let the
          Committee decide the matter afresh within 15 days of the receipt
          of the report after hearing the concerned parties. Factual position
          from SDM may also be ascertained as he has written letter dated
          03.04.2019.
As prayed for by Mr. Abhimanyu Bhandari, learned
          counsel, it is open to the applicants to maintain the horticulture
          and watering of the plants etc.
                  For taking out the essential items etc., it is open to the
          applicant to apply to the Committee.”


      This Court directed the Monitoring Committee to give its considered

opinion specifically as to whether at any point in time in the past, it sealed

any residential premises, which were not misused for commercial purposes.

The Monitoring Committee kept silent on this aspect and did not cite even a

single such instance. Four orders referred to by the Monitoring Committee

neither deal with the question of the power of the Monitoring Committee, nor

they are relevant to the point in question.
62
85.   It is apparent from the various orders passed by this Court from time

to time and from the various reports of the Monitoring Committee that it was

never authorized by this Court to take action against the residential

premises that were not being used for commercial purposes.              It was

appointed only to check the misuser of the residential properties for

commercial purposes.      After that, this Court directed that the Monitoring

Committee should also look into the matter of “encroachment on the public

land” and “unauthorized colonies” that have come up on the public land and

were wholly unauthorized without sanction. At no point in time, this Court

had empowered the Monitoring Committee to act vis­à­vis to the purely

residential premises.
86.   The power of sealing of property carries civil consequences. A person

can be deprived of the property by following a procedure in accordance with

law. The Monitoring Committee is not authorized to take action concerning

the residential premises situated on the private land. If there is unauthorized

construction or in case of deviation, the requisite provisions are under the
DMC Act
, such as
sections 343
,
345
,
347(A)
,
347(B)
. The mode of action

and adjudication under the Act is provided including appellate provisions

and that of the Tribunal.     It would not be appropriate to the Monitoring

Committee to usurp statutory powers and act beyond authority conferred

upon it by the Court. The Monitoring Committee could not have sealed the

residential premises, which were not misused for the commercial purpose as

done vide Report No.149, nor it could have directed the demolition of those

residential properties.
63
87.
Article 300A
of the Constitution provides that nobody can be deprived

of the property and right of residence otherwise in the manner prescribed by

law. When the statute prescribes a mode, the property's deprivation cannot

be done in other modes since this Court did not authorize the Committee to

take action in the matter.           An action could have been taken in no other

manner except in accordance with the procedure prescribed by law as laid

down in the decisions referred to at the Bar thus:
(
a)       State of Rajasthan v. Basant Nahata
, (2005) 12 SCC 77, wherein this

Court observed:
“59. ….In absence of any substantive provisions contained in
               a parliamentary or legislative act, he cannot be refrained from
               dealing with his property in any manner he likes. Such statutory
               interdict would be opposed to one’s right of property as
               envisaged under
Article 300-A
of the Constitution.”
(
b)       K.T. Plantation Pvt. Ltd v. State of Karnataka
(2011) 9 SCC 1 in which

it was opined:
“168.
Article 300-A
proclaims that no person can be deprived
               of his property save by authority of law, meaning thereby that a
               person cannot be deprived of his property merely by an
               executive fiat, without any specific legal authority or without the
               support of law made by a competent legislature. The expression
               “property” in
Article 300-A
confined not to land alone, it
               includes intangibles like copyrights and other intellectual
               property and embraces every possible interest recognised by law.
169. This Court in
State of W.B. v. Vishnunarayan and
               Associates (P) Ltd.6
, while examining the provisions of the
West
               Bengal Great Eastern Hotel (Acquisition of Undertaking) Act,
               1980
, held in the context of
Article 300-A
that the State or
               executive officers cannot interfere with the right of others unless
               they can point out the specific provisions of law which
               authorises their rights.”
                                                              (emphasis supplied)
6
(2002) 4 SCC 134
64
(c)   In
T. Vijayalakshmi v. Town Planning Member
, (2006) 8 SCC 502, the

Court observed:
“13. Town Planning legislations are regulatory in nature. The
            right to property of a person would include a right to construct a
            building. Such a right, however, can be restricted by reason of a
            legislation. In terms of the provisions of the
Karnataka Town and
            Country Planning Act
, a comprehensive development plan was
            prepared. It indisputably is still in force. Whether the
            amendments to the said comprehensive development plan as
            proposed by the Authority would ultimately be accepted by the
            State or not is uncertain. It is yet to apply its mind. Amendments
            to a development plan must conform to the provisions of the Act.
            As noticed hereinbefore, the State has called for objection from
            the citizens. Ecological balance no doubt is required to be
            maintained and the courts while interpreting a statute should
            bestow serious consideration in this behalf, but ecological
            aspects, it is trite, are ordinarily a part of the town planning
            legislation. If in the legislation itself or in the statute governing
            the field, ecological aspects have not been taken into
            consideration keeping in view the future need, the State and the
            Authority must take the blame therefor. We must assume that
            these aspects of the matter were taken into consideration by the
            Authority and the State. But the rights of the parties cannot be
            intermeddled with so long as an appropriate amendment in the
            legislation is not brought into force.
* * *
15. The law in this behalf is explicit. Right of a person to
            construct residential houses in the residential area is a valuable
            right. The said right can only be regulated in terms of a
            regulatory statute but unless there exists a clear provision the
            same cannot be taken away. ….”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
(d)   In the matter of
State of U.P. v. Manohar
(2005) 2 SCC 126, this Court

observed:
“7. Ours is a constitutional democracy and the rights available to
            the citizens are declared by the Constitution. Although
Article
            19(1)(f)
was deleted by the Forty-fourth Amendment to the
            Constitution,
Article 300-A
has been placed in the Constitution,
            which reads as follows:
65
“300-A. Persons not to be deprived of property save by
                       authority of law.—No person shall be deprived of his
                       property save by authority of law.”
8. This is a case where we find utter lack of legal authority for
               deprivation of the respondent’s property by the appellants who
               are State authorities. …”
(e)       In
Delhi Airtech Services (P) Ltd. & Anr. v. State of U.P. & Anr.
(2011) 9

SCC 354, this Court held:
“83. The expression “law” which figures both in
Article 21
and
Article 300-A
must be given the same meaning. In both the cases
               the law would mean a validly enacted law. In order to be valid
               law it must be just, fair and reasonable having regard to the
               requirement of
Articles 14
and
21
as explained in Maneka
               Gandhi. This is especially so, as “law” in both the
Articles 21
and
300-A
is meant to prevent deprivation of rights. Insofar as
Article 21
is concerned, it is a fundamental right whereas in
Article 300-A
it is a constitutional right which has been given a
               status of a basic human right.”
(f)       It was further argued that planning laws are expropriatory and should

be strictly construed, and any ambiguity is to be construed in favour of the

property owner as
laid down in
Delhi Airtech Services (P) Ltd.v. & Anr. v. State

of U.P. & Anr.
(supra) thus:
“129. Statutes which encroach upon rights, whether as regards
               person or property, are subject to strict construction in the same
               way as penal Acts. It is a recognised rule that they should be
               interpreted, if possible, so as to respect such rights and if there is
               any ambiguity, the construction which is in favour of the
               freedom of the individual should be adopted. (See Maxwell on
               The Interpretation of Statutes, 12th Edn. by P. St. J. Langan.)
130. This Court in Devinder Singh7 held that the
Land
               Acquisition Act
is an expropriatory legislation and followed the
               case of
Hindustan Petroleum Corpn. v. Darius Shapur Chenai
8.
Therefore, it should be construed strictly. The Court has also
7
(2008) 1 SCC 728
8
(2005) 7 SCC 627
66
taken the view that even in cases of directory requirements,
             substantial compliance with such provision would be necessary.”
                                                         (emphasis supplied)
(g)     In
Ramchandra Ravindra Waghmare v. Indore Municipal Corporation
,

(2017) 1 SCC 667, it was opined:
“67. It was also submitted that town planning and municipal
             institutes are regulating and restricting the use of private
             property under the aforesaid Acts. They are “expropriatory
             legislation”. Thus they are liable to be construed strictly as
laid
             down in
Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke &
             Chemicals Ltd.9”
(h)     In
Chairman, Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke &

Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.
, (2007) 8 SCC 705, it was held:
“57.
The Act
being regulatory in nature as by reason thereof the
             right of an owner of property to use and develop stands
             restricted, requires strict construction. An owner of land
             ordinarily would be entitled to use or develop the same for any
             purpose unless there exists certain regulation in a statute or
             statutory rules. Regulations contained in such statute must be
             interpreted in such a manner so as to least interfere with the right
             to property of the owner of such land. Restrictions are made in
             larger public interest. Such restrictions, indisputably must be
             reasonable ones. (See
Balram Kumawat v. Union of India10
;
Krishi Utpadan Mandi Samiti v. Pilibhit Pantnagar Beej Ltd.11
and
Union of India v. West Coast Paper Mills Ltd.12
) The
             statutory scheme contemplates that a person and owner of land
             should not ordinarily be deprived from the user thereof by way
             of reservation or designation.
58. Expropriatory legislation, as is well-known, must be given a
             strict construction.”
(i)     In
State of Gujarat v. Shantilal Mangaldas & Ors.
, (1969) 1 SCC 509, it

was held:
“55. …… Once the draft town-planning scheme is sanctioned,
             the land becomes subject to the provisions of the Town Planning
9
Indore Vikas Pradhikaran v. Pure Industrial Coke & Chemicals Ltd. & Ors.(2007) 8 SCC 705.
10
(2003) 7 SCC 628
11
(2004) 1 SCC 391
12
(2004) 2 SCC 747
67
Act, and on the final town-planning scheme being sanctioned, by
         statutory operation the title of the various owners is readjusted
         and the lands needed for a public purpose vest in the local
         authority. Land required for any of the purposes of a town
         planning scheme cannot be acquired otherwise than under the
         Act, for it is a settled rule of interpretation of statutes that when
         power is given under a statute to do a certain thing in a certain
         way the thing must be done in that way or not at all:”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
(j)   In
Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd.
, (2003) 2 SCC

111, it was opined:
“40. The statutory interdict of use and enjoyment of the property
         must be strictly construed. It is well settled that when a statutory
         authority is required to do a thing in a particular manner, the
         same must be done in that manner or not at all. The State and
         other authorities while acting under the said Act are only creature
         of statute. They must act within the four corners thereof.”
         (emphasis supplied)
(k)   In
Shrirampur Municipal Council v. Satyabhamabai Bhimaji Dawkher
(2013) 5 SCC 627 it was held:
“43. …… This is the reason why time-limit of ten years has been
         prescribed in
Section 31(5)
and also under
Sections 126
and
127
of the 1966 Act for the acquisition of land, with a stipulation that
         if the land is not acquired within six months of the service of
         notice under
Section 127
or steps are not commenced for
         acquisition, reservation of the land will be deemed to have
         lapsed. Shri Naphade’s interpretation of the scheme of
Sections
         126
and
127
, if accepted, will lead to absurd results and the
         landowners will be deprived of their right to use the property for
         an indefinite period without being paid compensation. That
         would tantamount to depriving the citizens of their property
         without the sanction of law and would result in violation of
Article 300-A
of the Constitution.”
                                                       (emphasis supplied)
88.   It is quite apparent that particularly when the Monitoring Committee

is not empowered to take action, the incumbents could not have been

deprived of the due process of protection in accordance with law. As against
68
the action of the Monitoring Committee, no appeal lies elsewhere. Even High

Court is not authorized to entertain any matter and scrutinize its action,

such is the drastic step taken by this Court by way of an exceptional

measure in public interest, and it is confined to the misuse of residential

property for commercial purpose and encroachments and unauthorized

construction on the public land, roads.
89.     After going through the report of the Monitoring Committee and other

reports which have been relied upon by the Amicus Curiae, there is no

scintilla of doubt that the Monitoring Committee in the past at any point of

time did not seal any residential premises being used for residential

purposes, situated on the private land nor it could have ordered demolition.

The     ‘caption’   of   the   various   reports   of   Monitoring   Committee   i.e.

“PRELIMINARY REPORT OF THE MONITORING COMMITTEE FOR SEALING

OF COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL PREMISES” makes

it absolutely clear that Monitoring Committee did not entertain any doubt

about the purpose for which it was constituted.             Apart from that, it was

authorized by subsequent orders to act with respect to unauthorized

construction on the public land and roads that too, which violated the MPD­

2021.
90.     Learned Amicus Curiae raised the alternative submission that the

Monitoring Committee acted bonafidely at the instance of the letter written

by the Sub Divisional Magistrate. We are of the opinion that the Monitoring

Committee could not have acted based on any such letter.                It was not

permissible for the Monitoring Committee to act in the matter. May be that
69
it acted under some confusion created by the letter. Be that as it may. We

do not want to go further into the matter of bona fide. However, it is

apparent that its action was beyond the purpose for which it had been

appointed.
91.   We are not going into the merits of the other submissions, whether the

premises are authorized or unauthorized, can be regularized or not,

compounding can be done, or whether there is any deviation made.         The

report of the Monitoring Committee and findings recorded by it are of no use

as it had no such authority to go into the various questions. This Court did

not appoint the Monitoring Committee concerning each and every residential

building on private land not misused for commercial purposes and to deal

with the same. In the present matter, this Court itself is monitoring the

matter for a limited public purpose. It has not taken away the powers of

statutory authorities under the Act concerning other matters except specified

in the order.
92.   Since we have considered only the ambit of powers of the Monitoring

Committee, we have not touched with the submissions which were not

relevant to decide, as raised by Mr. Govardhan.
93.   We quash Report No.149 and other reports submitted subsequently in

connection with Report No.149 and entire action of sealing pursuant thereto.

We also quash notices issued directing demolition where the matter was

being heard by this Court and the Monitoring Committee had no power to

look into the matter and to take any action. Let the property sealed as per
70
Report No.149 be de­sealed, and possession be restored to the owners

forthwith. Let this order be complied with within three days. However, we

clarify that this order does not at all mean to belittle the yeomen service

done by the Monitoring Committee for protection of Delhi. We also place on

record our deep appreciation for the selfless service done by Shri Ranjit

Kumar, Amicus Curiae, for the last 24 years, with unflinching hard work

and dedication along with his team of other Amicus in the matter.
Issue notice in IA No.64993 of 2020.
..................................J.
                                                             [ ARUN MISHRA ]




                                                  ..................................J.
                                                                  [ B.R. GAVAI ]




                                                  ..................................J.
                                                      [ KRISHNA MURARI ]
NEW DELHI;
AUGUST 14, 2020.