[Cites
17
, Cited by
0
]
Supreme Court of India
Commissioner Of Service Tax vs M/S Adani Gas Ltd. on 28 August, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIR 2020 SUPREME COURT 4404, AIRONLINE 2020 SC 709
Author:
D.Y. Chandrachud
Bench:
K M Joseph
,
Indu Malhotra
,
Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud
Reportable


                                         IN THE SUPREME COURT OF INDIA
                                         CIVIL APPELLATE JURISDICTION


                                           Civil Appeal No. 2633 of 2020



          Commissioner of Service Tax, Ahmedabad                               ...Appellant


                                                       Versus


          M/s Adani Gas Ltd.                                                   ...Respondent




                                                 JUDGMENT
Dr. Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, J




          1              This appeal arises from a judgment and order of the Customs, Excise, &

          Service Tax Appellate Tribunal,1 West Zonal Bench at Ahmedabad in Service

          dated 5 April 2019. The Tribunal has, in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction,

          reversed the 30 March 2011 decision of the Commissioner of Service Tax,

          Ahmedabad2 and set aside the demand for payment of service tax on the
Signature Not Verified
Digitally signed by
ARJUN BISHT
charges collected by the respondent for supply of pipes and measuring
Date: 2020.08.28
20:41:19 IST
Reason:
1
“Tribunal”
2
“Adjudicating Authority”
1
equipment to its customers under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act,

1994. This appeal rests on the interpretation and applicability of the provisions of
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act, 1994.
2         The respondent is in the business of distributing natural gas - Compressed

Natural Gas3 and Piped Natural Gas4 - to industrial, commercial, and domestic

consumers. Among other purposes, industrial consumers use PNG for

manufacturing operations. Domestic and commercial consumers use PNG for

cooking, power supply and air-conditioning. In order to facilitate the distribution of

PNG to industrial, commercial and domestic consumers through pipes, the

respondent installs an equipment described as ‘SKID’ at their customers’ sites.

The SKID equipment consists of isolation valves, filters, regulators and electronic

meters. The equipment regulates the supply of PNG being distributed and

records the quantity of PNG consumed by the customer, which is then used for

billing purposes. The respondent enters into an agreement – the Gas Sales

Agreement5 - with consumers to whom gas is supplied by it.




3         The manufacture of CNG falls under Chapter Sub-Heading 27112900 of

the
Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985
. The respondent is also engaged in providing

the taxable service falling under the category of “transport of goods through

pipeline”, as defined in
Section 65(105)(zzz)
of the Finance Act, 1994. During the

course of an audit by the officers of Central Excise, Ahmedabad-I during January
3
“CNG”
4
“PNG”
5
“GSA”
2
2009, it was noticed that the respondent had received income under the head of

“gas connection charges” from its industrial, commercial, and domestic

customers. From the GSA and the invoices, it was found that charges were

collected for the “supply of pipes, measuring equipment etc.” while providing new

gas connections to customers. The ownership of the equipment is not with the

customer but is retained by the respondent. The customer does not have control

or any legal rights over the equipment. Value Added Tax was also not paid on

these charges collected from the customers. A Notice to Show Cause6 was

issued to the respondent on 13 October 2009 stating that the transactions

undertaken by them are covered under the category of “supply of tangible goods

service”, under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of Finance Act, 1994 which was

introduced by Notification No.18/2008- S.T. dated 10 May 2008, with effect from

16 May 2008. The Show Cause Notice required the respondent to pay service tax

with effect from 16 May 2008 on the gas connection charges recovered for the

period from 16 May 2008 to 31 March 2009. Three similar notices were issued to

the respondent for subsequent periods. The first notice indicated that the

respondent         had      received   gas   connection   charges   amounting   to   Rs.

23,37,51,903/-            on which service tax and cess amounting to Rs. 2,83,46,411/-

had not been deposited. The respondent was called upon to show cause why

service tax should not be demanded together with interest and penalties under
Sections 76
,
77
and
78
of the Finance Act, 1994.
6
“Show Cause Notice”
3
4           In their reply to the Show Cause Notice, the respondent stated that:
(i)        PNG is distributed through pipes to industrial, commercial and domestic

               customers. The SKID equipment is installed at the customers’ sites to

               regulate the supply of PNG distributed and record the quantity of PNG

               consumed for billing purposes;
(ii)       The GSA is entered into with the customer. The ‘SKID’ consists of

               isolation valves, filters, regulators and electronic meters;
(iii)      The equipment is installed at the location of the customer without the

               transfer of ownership and possession; and the respondent retains the

               right to use the equipment;
(iv)       The arrangement between the respondent and its customer provides

               for the supply of gas, for which measurement equipment (the SKID

               equipment), is installed at the cost of customers at their premises for

               the purpose of billing;
(v)        The equipment is used by the respondent for its own purposes and the

               customer does not use the measurement equipment;
(vi)       Under the GSA, the right to adjust, clean, handle, replace, maintain,

               remove or modify the equipment is conferred upon the respondent. The

               equipment is used by the respondent and the customer does not buy or

               use the equipment;
(vii)      Under the GSA, the respondent has a right of entry at all hours to the

               measurement equipment to a pipeline upto all consumption points and

               gas consuming facilities inside the buyer’s premises;
4
(viii)   The equipment is used only for metering and billing so as to not invite

               any dispute or objection from the customers; and
(ix)     The amount which is collected from the customer is in the form of an

               interest-free security deposit, for the purpose of ensuring safe-keeping

               of the measurement equipment as is required by Attachment 3 to

               Schedule A of the Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board

               (Determination of Network Tariff for City or Local Gas Distribution

               Networks and Compression Charge for CNG) Regulations 20087. This

               deposit is to be returned at the time of discontinuing or terminating the

               connection and between 25 to 100 per cent of the charges were

               refunded by the respondent in the year 2008-09.
The respondent thus contended that they were not liable to pay service tax and

consequently the demand for tax interest and penalty was not sustainable.


5            The Show Cause Notice was adjudicated by an order dated 30 March

2011 of the Adjudicating Authority. Confirming the demand, the Adjudicating

Authority noted that the demand in the Show Cause Notice was not under the

category of “transport of goods by pipeline or other conduit services” under
Section 65(105)(zzz)
on the charges recovered from the supply of gas, but for

supplying measurement equipment at the time of providing a new gas connection

to a customer, under the category of “supply of tangible goods services” under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
. The Adjudicating Authority held that “…there is a definite

element of service involved in this transaction.” The Adjudicating Authority held

that the respondent is not only a seller engaged in the sale of gas to the customer
7
“PNGRB Network Tariff Regulations 2008”, published vide notification dated 19 March 2008.
5
but also a service provider who supplies, installs and maintains measurement

equipment at the customers’ premises. The customer, in this view, is a purchaser

of gas and a service recipient for the supply, installation and maintenance of

measurement equipment. The fact that (i) ownership of the measurement

equipment vests with the respondent; and (ii) there is no transfer of the right of

possession and effective control is undisputed, thereby satisfying two of the

required ingredients for
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
. Noting that the purpose of the

measurement equipment is to ensure effective and accurate billing, the

Adjudicating Authority held that the expression ‘use’ is attracted and it is the

customer who must be held to be in use of the equipment, regardless of the

customer lacking technical expertise in handling the measurement equipment.

This conclusion was based on the following reasoning:
“The expression “use” does not mean that the recipient has to
             personally and physically use the equipment all the time. It
             broadly refers to the direct or indirect use whether personally
             or through anybody else and meant to serve the intended
             purpose of the goods. The contention of the said noticee that
             they use the “Measurement Equipment” which are installed
             for their own benefits and purposes is misplaced. Accuracy
             in billing is as much a concern of the buyer of gas as is
             of the seller and hence, he gets it installed at his own
             cost and therefore working of the “Measurement
             Equipment” is verified periodically by the buyer as well
             as the seller as agreed by both in the Agreement.”
             (emphasis supplied).
6     The order also noted that the entirety of the gas connection charges

collected at the time of installing the connection are not refunded at the time of

discontinuation   or   termination.     The       Adjudicating    Authority    allowed   the

respondent to claim the benefit of cum-tax value and reduced the demand for
6
service tax from Rs. 2,83,46,411/- to Rs. 2,52,73,526/-. Penalties were imposed

under
Sections 77
and
78
of the Finance Act 1994.
7     The respondent assailed the order of adjudication before the Tribunal. By

its judgment dated 05 April 2019, the Tribunal allowed the appeal filed by the

respondent. The Tribunal observed that the SKID equipment is installed by the

respondent at the customers’ site and at the cost of the customer without the

transfer of ownership and possession. However, the crucial issue which required

analysis was whether the SKID equipment is for the use of the customer.

Adverting to the GSA which is entered into between the respondent and its

customers, the Tribunal held:
“ … the appellant supplies natural gas through pipes to the
            Industrial, Commercial or Domestic customers and for this
            purpose installs an equipment called “SKID” at the customer’s
            site to regulate the supply of natural gas supplied through
            pipes and to record the quantity consumed by the customers
            for the purpose of billing. The gas pipeline from the nearest
            distribution point is laid and maintained by appellant at the
            cost of the customer and the measuring equipment is also
            supplied, installed and maintained by the appellant at the cost
            of the customer. The terms of the agreement leave no
            manner of doubt that the purpose of the equipment is to
            measure the amount of gas supplied to the customer for
            the purpose of billing. They are, therefore, for the use of
            the appellant and are not for use by the customers. The
            finding to the contrary recorded by the Adjudicating Authority
            is, therefore, not correct.” (emphasis supplied)
8     The Tribunal held that the metering equipment is installed for measuring

the amount of gas supplied to the customer for the purpose of billing; hence the

use of the equipment is by the respondent and not by the customer.
7
9       The decision of the Tribunal has been assailed on behalf of the

revenue/appellant in the appeals. Mr. Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General of

India, submitted that the GSA which is a ‘take or pay agreement’ demonstrates

that:
(i)     The SKID equipment is installed by the respondent at the cost of the

                buyer;
(ii)    Neither ownership nor possession of the equipment is transferred to

                the buyer;
(iii)   The measurement equipment is installed, maintained and repaired

                by the respondent at the cost of the buyer;
(iv)    Mere technical expertise on part of the respondent to operate the

                equipment does not preclude the usage by the buyer;
(v)     The buyer is as much concerned about the accuracy of the billing as

                the supplier of gas. The measurement equipment enures to the

                benefit of the buyer for the purpose of verifying the correctness of

                the charges levied based on the quantity of gas consumed;
(vi)    Though the gas connection charges which are initially recovered are

                claimed to be refundable, the quantum of refunds may vary from

                buyer to buyer and the data which was produced by the respondent

                indicates that in several cases full refunds have not been made; and
(vii)   The CBEC circular No. 334/1/2008-TRU dated 29 February 2008

                has clarified that transactions that enable usage of goods without

                transferring the right to use, are in the nature of a service under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
and not sale under
Article 366(29-A)(d)
of the
8
Constitution of India. Since the respondent has not paid VAT for the

              charges collected on supply of pipelines and the measurement

              equipment, this transaction must be treated as a service.
10    The ASG submitted that the use of the SKID equipment is not merely by

the respondent as the seller of gas but by the buyer as well for the purpose of

verifying the accuracy of billing. The decision of the Tribunal was faulted on the

ground that its finding - that the use of the equipment is by the seller - is contrary

to the terms of the GSA.
11    Opposing these submissions Mr Vikram Nankani, learned Senior Counsel

appearing on behalf of the respondent, submitted that:
(i)     The GSA is an agreement for the sale and purchase of goods,

              namely, PNG;
(ii)    The terms of the GSA provide contractual rights to the buyer,

              including the right to verify and dispute the bill raised by the supplier

              and to seek arbitration;
(iii)   The rights of a buyer of gas under the GSA must be kept distinct

              from the use of the SKID equipment and the essential issue in the

              present case is whether the equipment is installed for the use of the

              buyer;
(iv)    Under the terms of the GSA, ownership continues to vests with the

              respondent at all times and the buyer of gas is not entitled to adjust,
9
modify or maintain the equipment. The buyer has no possessory

        right nor can they lease or sub-let the equipment;
(v)     The purpose of the measurement equipment in a gas supply

        contract is to measure the quantity of gas supplied to the buyer of

        gas. However, the buyer gets no service out of the equipment;
(vi)    In determining the issue in appeal, it is necessary to isolate the

        rights conferred by the GSA on the buyer of gas from the issue as to

        whether the buyer has the use of the SKID equipment. The SKID

        equipment is a technical device and the buyer has no right to use

        the equipment; and this inability to use the equipment by the

        customer would not be within the scope of the taxing provision,

        which must be construed strictly;
(vii)   Amounts collected under the head of “gas connection charges” are

        mainly in the nature of interest-free security deposits, which are

        required to be refunded in part, or in full, depending on the duration

        of the contract which determines depreciation. They are not

        collected as a consideration for providing a service; and under
Article 366(29-A)(d)
, a tax on the sale or purchase of goods includes

        a tax on the transfer of the right to use goods for any purpose,

        without necessarily transferring the title.
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
was

        introduced with the intention of capturing services which were

        technically not ‘sales’ and were escaping the net of VAT. In the

        present case, there is no transfer of the right to use the equipment

        nor is there any element of service in the supply of the metering
10
equipment. The equipment is installed by the respondent as a seller

               of gas and is not used by the buyer.
12     The question that arises for our consideration is whether
Section

65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act, 1994 is applicable in the present case, that is,

whether the supply of pipes and measurement equipment (SKID equipment),

charged under the head of “gas connection charges” by the respondent to its

industrial, commercial, and domestic consumers, amounts to supply of tangible

goods for their use. While assessing the merits of the rival submissions, it is

necessary to interpret the provisions of
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
.



13
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act 1994 provides for taxability of

supply of tangible goods for use, without transferring right of possession and

effective control over such goods, as a ‘taxable service’.
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of

the Finance Act, 1994 reads as follows:
“65(105) “taxable service” means any service provided or to
               be provided-
xx                     xx                    xx

               (zzzzj) to any person, by any other person in relation to
               supply of tangible goods including machinery, equipment
               and appliances for use, without transferring right of
               possession and effective control of such machinery,
               equipment and appliances.”
14
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act 1994 was introduced by

Notification   No.18/2008-S.T.      with    effect   from    16    May       2008.
Section

65(105)(zzzzj)
levies a service tax on the use of tangible goods. On the other
11
hand, the transfer of the right to use any goods is treated as a ‘deemed sale’ and

is subject to sales tax under
Article 366(29-A)(d)
of the Constitution of India. It is

necessary to distinguish the applicability of these two provisions.
Article 366(29-

A)(d)
, provides:
“(366)(29-A) tax on the sale or purchase of goods includes—

                              xx                       xx                       xx
(d) a tax on the transfer of the right to use any goods for any
                    purpose (whether or not for a specified period) for cash, deferred
                    payment or other valuable consideration;
xx                       xx                       xx

                    and such transfer, delivery or supply of any goods shall be deemed
                    to be a sale of those goods by the person making the transfer,
                    delivery or supply and a purchase of those goods by the person to
                    whom such transfer, delivery or supply is made.”
15         The applicability of
Article 366(29-A)(d)
was discussed in a decision of this

Court in
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and another v. Union of India
and

others8 (“BSNL”). In BSNL, the Court held that the purpose of
Article 366(29-

A)(d)
was to levy tax on those transactions where there was a “transfer of the

right to use any goods” to the purchaser, instead of passing the title or ownership

of the goods. Thus, by a fiction of law, these transactions were now treated as

‘sale’. Elucidating on the “transfer of the right to use any goods”, Dr A R

Lakshmanan J. in a concurring opinion held:
“97. To constitute a transaction for the transfer of the right to
                             use the goods, the transaction must have the following
                             attributes:
a.   there must be goods available for delivery;
                        b.   there must be a consensus ad idem as to the identity of
                             the goods;
8
2006 (3) SCC (1).
12
c.   the transferee should have a legal right to use the
                         goods- consequently all legal consequences of such
                         use including any permissions or licenses required
                         therefore should be available to the transferee;
                    d.   for the period during which the transferee has such
                         legal right, it has to be the exclusion to the
                         transferor; this is the necessary concomitant of the
                         plain language of the statute viz. a “transfer of the
                         right to use” and not merely a licence to use the
                         goods;
e.   having transferred the right to use the goods during the
                         period for which it is to be transferred, the owner cannot
                         again transfer the same rights to others.”
                                                             (emphasis supplied)
16        The test
laid down in
BSNL has been applied by courts to determine

whether a transaction involves the “transfer of the right to use any goods” under
Article 366(29-A)(d).
In doing so, the courts have analysed the terms of the

agreement underlying the transaction to ascertain whether effective control and

possession has been transferred by the supplier to the recipient of the goods.

Recently, this Court in Great Eastern Shipping Company Limited. v. State of

Karnataka and others9 considered whether the transfer of a vessel under a

charter party agreement was a ‘deemed sale’, subject to sales tax. The Court,

after analysing the terms of the charter party agreement, held:
“43. We are not turning our decision upon the terms used
                   like ‘let’, ‘hire’, ‘delivery’ and ‘redelivery’ but on the other
                   essential terms of the Charter Party Agreement entered in
                   the instant case which clearly makes out that there is a
                   transfer of exclusive right to use the vessel which is a
                   deemed sale and is liable to tax under the KST Act. In the
                   instant case, full control of the vessel had been given to
                   the charterer to use exclusively for six months, and
                   delivery had also been made. The use by charterer
                   exclusively for six months makes it out that it is
                   definitely a contract of transfer of right to use the vessel
                   with which we are concerned in the instant matter, and
                   that is a deemed sale as specified in
Article 366(29A)(d).
On the basis of the abovementioned decision, it was urged
9
2020 (3) SCC 354.
13
that all Charter Party Agreements are service agreements.
The submission cannot be accepted, as there is no
                     general/invariable rule/law in this regard. It depends upon
                     the terms and conditions of the charterparty when it is to be
                     treated as only for service and when it is the transfer of right
                     to use.
xx                     xx                       xx
54. When we consider the charterparty in question in the
                     context of applicable law, particularly in view of the
                     constitutional provisions of
Article 366(29A)(d)
, we find that
                     there is transfer of right to use tangible goods, which is
                     determinative of deemed sale as per the Constitution of India
                     and provisions of section 5C reflecting the said intendment.
We are of the considered opinion that there is transfer of
                     right to use exclusively given to charterer for six
                     months, and the vessel has been kept under the
                     exclusive control. The charterer qualifies the test
laid
                     down by
this court in BSNL (supra).”
                                                            (emphasis supplied)

17         Therefore, sales tax is levied in pursuance of
Article 366(29-A)(d)
on

transactions which resemble a sale in substance as they result in a transfer of the

right to use in goods, instead of the transfer of title in goods.
The Finance Act,

1994
, deriving authority from the residuary Entry 97 of the Union List, enabled the

Central Government to levy tax on services.
‘Service tax’ was introduced as a

response to the advancement of the contemporary world where an indirect tax

was necessary to capture consumption of services, which are economically

similar to consumption of goods, in as much as they both satisfy human needs.10

This Court, in
Association of Leasing and Financial Service Companies v.

Union of India,11
had noted:
“38…Today with technological advancement there is a very
                     thin line which divides a “sale” from “service”. That, applying
                     the principle of equivalence, there is no difference between
                     production or manufacture of saleable goods and production
                     of marketable/saleable services in the form of an activity
10
All India Federation of Tax Practitioners v. Union of India
, (2007) 7 SCC 527, para 4.
11
(2011) 2 SCC 352.
14
undertaken by the service provider for consideration, which
              correspondingly stands consumed by the service receiver. It
              is this principle of equivalence which is inbuilt into the
              concept of service tax under the
Finance Act, 1994
. That
              service tax is, therefore, a tax on an activity. That, service
              tax is a value added tax. The value addition is on account of
              the activity which provides value addition…Thus, service
              tax is imposed every time service is rendered to the
              customer/client…Thus, the taxable event is each
              exercise/activity undertaken by the service provider and
              each time service tax gets attracted.” (emphasis supplied)

18     The introduction of
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
in the
Finance Act, 1994
, was

with the intention of taxing such activities that enable the customer’s use of the

service provider’s goods without transfer of the right of possession and effective

control. This provision creates an element of taxation over a service, as opposed

to a ‘deemed sale’ under
Article 366(29-A)(d).
For the purpose of clarification, the

Department of Revenue issued a Circular, D.O.F. No.334/1/2008-TRU, dated 29

February, 2008. The said circular clarified the applicability of
Section

65(105)(zzzzj)
vis-à-vis
Article 366(29-A)(d).
The relevant portions of the circular

are as follows:
“4.4 SUPPLY OF TANGIBLE GOODS FOR USE:
4.4.1 Transfer of the right to use any goods is leviable to
              sales tax/VAT as deemed sale of goods [
Article 366(29A)(d)
of the Constitution of India]. Transfer of right to use
              involves transfer of both possession and control of the
              goods to the user of the goods.
4.4.2 Excavators, wheel loaders, dump trucks, crawler
              carriers, compaction equipment, cranes, etc., offshore
              construction vessels & barges, geo-technical vessels, tug
              and barge flotillas, rigs and high value machineries are
              supplied for use, with no legal right of possession and
              effective control. Transaction of allowing another person
              to use the goods, without giving legal right of
              possession and effective control, not being treated as
              sale of goods, is treated as service.
15
4.4.3 Proposal is to levy service tax on such services
                    provided in relation to supply of tangible goods, including
                    machinery, equipment and appliances, for use, with no legal
                    right of possession or effective control. Supply of tangible
                    goods for use and leviable to VAT / sales tax as deemed
                    sale of goods, is not covered under the scope of the
                    proposed service. Whether a transaction involves
                    transfer of possession and control is a question of facts
                    and is to be decided based on the terms of the contract
                    and other material facts. This could be ascertainable
                    from the fact whether or not VAT is payable or paid.”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
19         The above circular clarified that
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
is applicable only to

those transactions where there is a supply of tangible goods for use, without the

transfer of possession or effective control to the recipient. This aspect has been

interpreted by various courts and tribunals.
In the Bombay High Court decision in
Indian National Shipowners’ Association and Anr. v. Union of India and

others
(“Shipowners”),12 the petitioners were engaged in providing services to

major exploration and production operators by supplying their various vessels

including offshore drilling rigs, offshore support vessels, harbour tugs, and

construction barges. The question before the Bombay High Court was whether,

prior to the introduction of
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
in 2008, the petitioner could be

taxed on its services in relation to mining of mineral, oil, or gas under
Section

65(105)(zzzy)
.
In the present matter, we are not concerned with the merits of

Shipowners’, which was affirmed on appeal by this Court in
Union of India v.

Indian National Shipowners’ Association and Anr.13 This
Court explicitly

restricted itself to the interpretation of
Section 65(105)(zzz)
while leaving the

other observations on interpretation of the law, “open to be considered at length
12
(2009) 4 AIR Bom R 775.
13
2010 (14) SCC 438.
16
at an appropriate stage”.14 We note however, the analysis of
Section

65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Bombay High Court, where the High Court observed:
“38. Entry (zzzzj) is entirely a new entry. Whereas Entry
                    (zzzy) covers services provided to any person in relation to
                    mining of mineral, oil or gas, services covered by Entry
                    (zzzzj) can be identified by the presence of two
                    characteristics namely (a) supply of tangible goods
                    including machinery, equipment and appliances for use,
(b) there is no transfer of right of possession and
                    effective control of such machinery, equipment and
                    appliances. According to the members of the 1st petitioner,
                    they supply offshore support vessels to carry out jobs like
                    anchor handling, towing of vessels, supply to rig or platform,
                    diving support, fire fighting etc. Their marine construction
                    barges      support     offshore    construction,     provide
                    accommodation, crane support and stoppage area on main
                    deck or equipment. Their harbour tugs are deployed for
                    piloting big vessels in and out of the harbour and for
                    husbanding main fleet. They give vessels on time charter
                    basis to oil and gas producers to carry out offshore
                    exploration and production activities. The right of
                    possession and effective control of such machinery,
                    equipment and appliances is not parted with. [...]”
                                                          (emphasis supplied)
20         The taxable service is defined as a service which is provided or which is to

be provided by any person to another “in relation to supply of tangible goods”.

The provision indicates that the goods may include machinery, equipment or

appliances. The crucial ingredient of the definition is that the supply of tangible

goods is for the use of another, without transferring the right of possession and

effective control “of such machinery, equipment and appliances”. Hence, in order

to attract the definition of a taxable service under sub-clause (zzzzj), the

ingredients that have to be fulfilled are:
(i)     The provision of a service;
14
2010 (14) SCC 438, para 7.
17
(ii)    The service is provided by a person to another person;
(iii)   The service is provided in relation to the supply of tangible goods,

               including machinery, equipment and appliances;
(iv)    There is no transfer of the right of possession;
(v)     Effective control over the goods continues to be with the service

               provider; and
(vi)    The goods are supplied for use by the recipient of the service.


There is an element of service which is the foundation for the levy of the tax.


21     A GSA entered into by the respondent on 17 November 2008 with one of

its buyers (Polymer Industries) has been adverted to by the contesting parties as

a representative sample. Under the terms of the GSA, the respondent as the

seller agrees to sell and tender for delivery at the ‘Delivery Point’, gas in the

quantities, times and at the prices determined in accordance with it. Clause 2.1

stipulates that:
“2.1. The Seller agrees to sell and tender for delivery at the
               Delivery Point, and the Buyer agrees to purchase and receive
               at the Delivery Point and pay for Gas in quantities at the times
               and at the prices determined in accordance with, and subject
               to the terms and conditions of this Agreement.”

The expression ‘Delivery Point’ is defined thus:
“ “Delivery Point” means the flange or weld or agreed mark at
               the downstream of the isolation valve located immediately
               outside the Buyer’s premise as identified in Schedule 2.”
18
Clause 5.1 requires the seller to deliver gas to the buyer at the Delivery Point.
The seller is required to set up a gas pipeline to the metering station of the buyer

from the nearest distribution mains at the cost of the buyer:
“5.1. The seller shall deliver the Gas to the Buyer at the
             Delivery Point in accordance with the terms of this
             Agreement. Gas pipeline to the Buyer’s metering station
             from nearest distribution mains would be constructed
             and maintained by the Seller at the Buyer’s cost.”

                                                    (emphasis supplied)



Clause 5.3 states that the ‘Measurement Equipment’ is to be supplied, installed

and maintained by the seller at the cost of the buyer:
“5.3. The Measurement Equipment shall be supplied,
             installed and maintained by the Seller at the Buyer’s cost.
             Ownership of equipment will rest with AEL [respondent
             herein] forever. Buyer shall provide free of cost adequate
             land and power connection in its premise for the installation of
             Measurement Equipment. Buyer shall pay for providing gas
             pipeline connection including pipeline from distribution mains
             upto the measurement equipment; and measurement
             equipment to its unit as per the proposal submitted by the
             Seller.”

                                            (emphasis supplied)

Clause 5.4 provides that:
“5.4. Gas pipeline from nearest Distribution Mains to the
             Measurement equipment shall be constructed and
             maintained by the Seller at Buyer's cost. The Buyer agrees
             to let the Seller or his authorised representative to supply,
             construct, install commission and maintain the supply pipeline
             from main distribution line upto the Measurement Equipment
             and Measurement Equipment in its premises.
(emphasis supplied)



The Buyer’s Facilities and Seller’s Facilities are defined to include the

measurement equipment and pipelines and have been defined as follows:
19
“ “Buyers Facilities" means plant, machinery, measurement
             equipment and other equipment from the Delivery Point
             onwards necessary to receive Gas under this Agreement.”

             “ “Seller’s Facilities” means the Seller’s pipelines, gas plants,
             machinery, Measurement Equipment, other metering facilities
             and other equipment necessary for flow control and the
             processing, compression, measuring and testing of Gas to
             enable delivery of Gas to the Buyer at the Delivery Point.”

Further, the expression ‘Measurement Equipment’ is defined as follows:
“ “Measurement equipment” means such main and subsidiary
             meter, including apparatus, mains and pipes, as the Seller
             considers necessary for the measurement and recording of
             the volume in SCM and pressure in Kg/cm2 of Gas delivered
             at the Delivery Point and for the safe operation of the Buyer’s
             Facilities.”

Ownership of the measurement equipment continues to vest with the respondent

as per clause 5.3. The buyer is required to provide land and a power connection,

free of cost at its premises. The buyer has to pay for providing a gas pipeline

connection from the distribution mains up to the measurement equipment.
Gas is transported from the ‘Measurement Equipment’ by means of a pipeline

provided by the buyer as stipulated in Clause 5.5:
“5.5. Gas will be transported from the Measurement
             equipment by means of a pipeline provided by the Buyer as
             per the specifications and applicable standards provided by
             the Seller and the same shall be maintained by the Buyer.
             The Seller reserves the right to supply other Buyer’s before
             the upstream range of measurement equipment installed at
             its premises.”

Clause 5.6 clarifies that the buyer has no right to adjust, clean, handle, replace,

maintain, remove or modify the measurement equipment:
“5.6. The Buyer shall not have the right to adjust, clean,
             handler, replace, maintain, remove or modify in any manner
             measurement equipment at any time during the currency of
             the Contract.”
20
Under clause 5.7 the buyer cannot lease, sublet or sell the measurement

equipment:
“5.7. The Buyer under no circumstances shall
                     sublet/lease/sell/create a charge over part or whole of
                     measurement equipment at any given time.”

Clause 5.10 provides that the seller has the right of entry to the measurement

equipment:
“5.10. The Seller or his authorized representative shall have
                     right of entry at all hours to the Measurement Equipment,
                     route of pipeline upto all consumption points and gas
                     consuming facilities inside the Buyer’s premises.”



Under clause 7.1, ‘title and risk’ in the gas passes from the seller to the buyer at

the Delivery Point. Clause 8.1 defines the expression ‘Daily Contract Quantity’15.
Clause 9.2 of the agreement deals with measurement and calibration:
“9.2     Measurement and Calibration

                     9.2.1    Quantity of Gas supplied under this Agreement shall
                              be measured at the Delivery Point in SCM. The
                              measurement shall include all corrections in
                              installation practices recommended for accurate
                              metering of Gas by the American Gas Association
                              (AGA) Gas Measurement Committee report No. 3,7
                              and 8.
9.2.2    The Measurement Equipment shall be supplied,
                              installed, owned and maintained by the Seller at
                              the Buyer’s cost.
9.2.3     Working of the Measurement Equipment shall be
                              verified periodically by the Parties.
15
“8.1. Daily Contract Quantity
(a) “Daily Contract Quantity” or “DCQ” shall be equal to 100 SCM per day having approximately Gross
              Calorific Value (GCV) of 9000 Kcal/scm.
(b) Provided further, if on any Day, the Buyer requires Gas in excess of Daily Contract Quantity, the seller
              may supply the same subject to availability of gas with Seller and Seller’s Operational Flexibility.
(c) Supplier subject to the operational flexibility and availability of the gas supply the Daily Contract
              Quantity however the Seller shall have the freedom to curtail, stop or interrupt the gas supply with prior
              notice to the Buyer.
21
9.2.4   If the Buyer has any doubt as to the accuracy of
        the     Measurement         Equipment,      it    shall
        communicate the same to the Seller in writing and
        request the Seller to either check or re-calibrate
        the Measurement Equipment. The Seller shall
        undertake     such     check/re-calibration    of   the
        Measurement Equipment within fourteen (14) days of
        receipt of such request. The cost of conducting the
        checks/re-calibration shall be borne by the Buyer.
9.2.5    If the seller has any doubt about the proper working
        of the Measurement Equipment, it may immediately
        check the meter in presence of the Buyer’s
        representative. In case it is established that the
        existing Measurement Equipment is not working
        satisfactorily, the same shall be replaced at the
        Buyer’s cost.
9.2.6    If on carrying out the check/re-calibration of the
        Measurement Equipment as aforesaid it is discovered
        that either the percentage of inaccuracy exceed – 2%
        (Two per cent) or that the Measurement Equipment is
        out of service, the following procedure in order of
        priority, whichever is feasible for arriving at the
        computation of quantity of Gas during the period
        between the last calibration and the present, shall be
        followed:
(a)    by correcting the error if the percentage of
               error is ascertainable by calibration, tests or
               mathematical calculation; or
(b)    by estimating the volume of Gas delivered by
               comparison with deliveries during the period
               under    similar   conditions   when     the
               Measurement Equipment was registering
               accurately.
9.2.7   If at the time of carrying out the check of the
        Measurement Equipment as above, it is discovered
        that the error in the readings of the Measurement
        Equipment exceeds- 2.0% the Measurement
        Equipment shall be re-calibrated at Buyer’s cost.
9.2.8   Notwithstanding      anything    contained    in    this
        Agreement, pending the result of any check/re-
calibration, the Buyer shall not withhold payments to
        the Seller under this Agreement on this account.
However, the Buyer shall be entitled to lodge his
        claim for refunds/adjustments, if any, depending upon
        the final results of such check/re-calibration within a
        period of fourteen (14) days of such check/re-
22
calibration. Such claim, if found correct by the Seller,
                     shall be adjusted against the subsequent invoice(s) of
                     supply of Gas.
9.2.9   Pending the resolution of any dispute, the Seller shall
                     produce the invoices on the basis of self-verification.”
                     (emphasis supplied)



The provisions for billing and payment are contained in clause 12. The relevant

portion is extracted below:
“12. Billing and Payment

             12.1 Following the end of the Fortnight, the Seller shall
             render to the Buyer a statement including the following details
             for each Day of the previous Fortnight (hereinafter referred to
             as the “Fortnightly Invoice”), which shall show in respect of
             the previous Fortnight, along with the details of calculations:
(i)     the DCQ for each Day of that Fortnight in SCM;

             (ii)    the aggregate quantity of Gas delivered by the Seller
in such Fortnight, in SCM and Gross Calorific Value
                     for the same;
(iii)   the Weighted Average Gross Calorific Value (GCV) of
                     such Gas taken by the Buyer in such fortnight;
(iv)    the amount payable by the Buyer to the Seller for the
                     quantifies of the Gas delivered during the Fortnight
                     equal to quantities of Gas delivered by the Seller in
                     SCM/Kcal as determined in (ii) above multiplied by
                     Contract Price prevailing for the Fortnight.
12.2    The Buyer shall within seven (7) days of the receipt of
                     the fortnightly invoice from the seller, pay to the seller
                     the amount mentioned in such invoice in the manner
                     to be specified by the Seller.
12.3.   The Buyer agrees that, notwithstanding any dispute in
                     relation to any amount invoiced, it shall not be
                     withhold payment in accordance with the provisions of
                     this
Section 12
of any amounts. After making full
                     payment of such invoice, the Buyer shall lodge the
                     claims with the Seller giving full particulars within a
                     period of fourteen (14) Days from the date of making
                     payment, and if such claims are found correct, the
                     Seller shall adjust the same against the next invoice.
                     It is further agreed that no interest will be payable by
23
the Seller on any such amount adjusted in the
                                subsequent invoices.”



Under clause 13, security for payment in the form of a cash deposit is required to

be maintained by the buyer equivalent to the DCQ16 multiplied by thirty and by

the contract price. If the seller draws upon the payment security, the buyer has to

make good the amount withdrawn.
Clause 14 of the Agreement further provides for the representations and

warranties of the buyer and seller. Clause 14.3 reads as follows:
“14.3 Buyer's Warranties and Undertakings

                     The Buyer warrants and undertakes to the Seller that
                     throughout the term of this Agreement:
a) the Buyer’s Facilities will be technically and operationally
                       compatible with the Seller's Facilities at the Delivery Point
                       and fit for purpose for off take of gas from the Delivery
                       Point;
b) the Buyer's Facilities will be maintained in good working
                       order and condition and so operated as to be compatible
                       with the fulfilment of the obligations of the Buyer under this
                       Agreement;…”


Under the above clause 14.3, the buyer warrants to maintain the “Buyer’s

Facilities”, which includes the ‘measurement equipment’, in good working order

and condition and technically and operationally compatible with the Seller’s

Facilities.
Under clause 16.4, if the buyer fails (otherwise than as a consequence of force

majeure or the seller’s default) to take fifty per cent or more of the cumulative

DCQ over 45 consecutive days, the seller is entitled to terminate the agreement.
16
“Daily Contract Quality”
24
22    The GSA is an agreement between the respondent and its purchaser for

regulating the terms on which gas is sold by the respondent. The agreement is of

a ‘take or pay’ genre. The buyer must lift the quantity contracted or pay for it. The

agreement provides for the supply of gas at the Delivery Point through gas

pipelines constructed from the distribution main to the measurement equipment.

Further, both the seller and the buyer have provided warranties for maintaining

the ‘measurement equipment’ in good working condition, in their respective

capacities. The measurement equipment, as has been re-iterated by the

respondent in the course of their arguments, is installed for the measurement and

recording of the volume and pressure of the gas delivered at the Delivery Point

and for the safe operation of the buyer’s facilities.
23    At the outset, it is clear from the provisions of the agreement, and it has

been admitted by both the parties, that there is no transfer of ownership or

possession of the pipelines or the measurement equipment (SKID equipment

equipment) by the respondent to its customers. Clause 5.3 of the agreement

specifically provides that the ‘Measurement Equipment’ is to be supplied,

installed and maintained by the seller at the cost of the buyer and that the

ownership of the equipment will rest with the respondent forever. Clause 5.6

further clarifies that the buyer has no right to adjust, clean, handle, replace,

maintain, remove or modify the measurement equipment. Clause 5.10

guarantees that the seller shall have the right of entry at all hours to the

Measurement Equipment and associated apparatus at the Buyer’s premises. The

pipelines are also part of the “Seller’s Facilities” under the agreement and are
25
constructed and maintained by the respondent at the cost of the customer. Thus,

the ingredient of not transferring the ownership, possession or effective control of

the goods under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
is satisfied.



24    The crux of the dispute is whether the supply of tangible goods – the SKID

equipment - is for the use of the purchaser. In determining as to whether the

provisions of
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
are attracted, it is necessary to distinguish

between the rights and obligations of the respondent (as the seller of gas) and of

their purchasers, from the issue of whether the measurement equipment (SKID

equipment) is supplied for the use of the purchaser of gas, without transferring

the right of possession and effective control.
25    The purchaser of gas has an interest in ensuring the accuracy of billing

and regulation of supply. The respondent is interested in ensuring that it receives

payment for the quantity of gas which is contracted to be supplied to the

purchaser. The ‘SKID’ consists of regulators, valves, filters and the metering

equipment. The SKID equipment regulates and records supply. Under the terms

of the GSA, the obligation of the seller is to deliver gas to the buyer at the

Delivery Point. The gas pipeline from the nearest distribution main to the buyers’

metering station is constructed and maintained by the seller at the cost of the

buyer. The measurement equipment is supplied, installed and maintained by the

seller at the cost of the buyer, inspite of ownership of the equipment resting with

the respondent as the seller. The measurement equipment is installed and

maintained exclusively by the seller. Clause 5.6 indicates that the buyer has no
26
right to adjust, clean, handle, replace, maintain, remove or modify it in any

manner. Clause 5.10 guarantees the seller’s access to the Measurement

Equipment at the buyer’s premises at all hours. Ownership, control and

possession of the measurement equipment is with the respondent. The

measurement equipment comprises not only of electronic meters that are useful

for determining the quantity of gas supplied to the purchaser at the Delivery

Point, but also of isolation valves, filters and regulators that are crucial for

regulating the pressure of gas and ensuring safe operation of the buyer’s

facilities. In order to maintain the sanctity of the equipment, the agreement casts

the exclusive responsibility to install and maintain it on the respondent as the

seller. The terms of the GSA would indicate that the quantity of gas supplied is to

be measured at the Delivery Point. For this purpose, the measurement

equipment is supplied, installed, owned and maintained by the seller at the cost

of the buyer. The working of the measurement equipment is verified periodically

by the parties to the agreement. If the buyer doubts its accuracy, this has to be

communicated in writing to the seller, who alone is entitled to test, re-calibrate,

remove or modify it. Similarly, if the seller has any doubt about the proper

working of the measurement equipment it is entitled to check the meter in the

presence of the representatives of the buyer. If according to the seller, the

existing measurement equipment is not working satisfactorily it would be replaced

at the cost of the buyer. These provisions indicate that the supply, installation and

maintenance of the measurement equipment is exclusively carried out by the

seller. The buyer has contractual remedies against the seller in terms of the GSA.

These remedies to the buyer as a purchaser of gas are distinct from the issue as
27
to whether the equipment for which gas connection charges are recovered is

used by the buyer.
26    Under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
, the taxable service is provided or to be

provided in relation to the supply of tangible goods for the use of another, without

transferring the right of possession and effective control. The expression “use”

has been defined in Black’s Law Dictionary:
“Use, n. Act of employing everything, or state of being
             employed; application, as the use of a pen, or his machines
             are in use. Also the fact of being used or employed habitually;
             usage, as, the wear and tear resulting from ordinary use.
             Berry-Kofron Dental Laboratory Co. v. Smith, 345 Mo. 922,
             137 S.W. 2d 452, 454, 455, 456. The purpose served; a
             purpose, object or end for useful or advantageous nature.
Brown v. Kennedy, Ohio Appellant. 49 N.E.2d 417, 418. To
             put or bring into action or service; to employ for or apply to a
             given purpose. Beggs v. Texas Dept. of Mental Health and
             Mental Retardation, Tex. Civ. App., 496 S.W.2d 252, 254. To
             avail oneself of; to employ; to utilize; to carry out a purpose or
             action by means of; to put into action or service, especially to
             attain an end. State v Howard, 221 Kan. 51, 557 P.2d 1280,
             1281.
Non-technical sense. The “use” of a thing means that one is
             to enjoy, hold, occupy or have some manner of benefit
             thereof. Use also means usefulness, utility, advantage,
             productive of benefit.”




27    The expression “use” does not have a fixed meaning. The content of the

expression must be based on the context in which the expression is adopted. The

use of an article may or may not result in a visible change in its form or

substance. Moreover, the nature of use is conditioned by the kind of article which

is put to use.
Section 65(105)
of the Finance Act, 1994 envisages myriad

interpretations of the expression “use”, in a variety of services such as
28
telecommunication,17 renting of immovable property,18 and services related to art,

entertainment, and marriage.19 In the case of some articles, use may be signified

by a physical operation of the article by the person who uses it. In such a case,

actual physical use is what is meant by the supply of the goods for the use of

another. In the case of others, the nature of the goods supplied impacts the

character of the use to which the goods can be put. As an illustration,
Section

65(105)(zzzze)
of the Finance Act, 1994, seeks to tax services related to

information technology and interprets the “right to use” to include the “right to

reproduce, distribute, sell, etc”.20 This understanding of “use” differs from the

supply of tangible goods under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
at hand, where effective

control or possession is not ceded. Thus, physical operation is not the only or

invariable feature of use. As a corollary to the same, technical expertise over the

goods in question is not a sine qua non for determining the ability of the

consumer to use the good. Therefore, the expression “use” also signifies the

application of the goods for the purpose for which they have been supplied under

the terms of a contract.
28      The terms of the GSA indicate that the supply, installation, maintenance

and repair of the measurement equipment is exclusively entrusted to the

respondent as the seller. These provisions have been incorporated in the GSA to

ensure that a buyer does not calibrate or tinker with the equipment. It is an

incident of ownership and control being vested with the respondent. The purpose

of the SKID equipment and its utility, lie in its ability to regulate the supply and
17
Section 65(105)(zzzzb)
, Finance Act, 1994.
18
Section 65(105)
(zzz-z),
Finance Act, 1994
.
19
Section 65(105)(zzzzr)
, Finance Act, 1994.
20
Circular D.O.F. No.334/1/2008-TRU, dated 29 February, 2008.
29
achieve an accurate verification of that which is supplied; in the present case the

supply of goods by the respondent to its buyers. This enures to the benefit of the

seller and the buyer. The seller is concerned with the precise quantification of the

gas which is supplied to the buyer. The buyer has an interest in ensuring the

safety of its facilities and that the billing is based on the correct quantity of gas

supplied and delivered under the GSA. To postulate, as did the Tribunal, that the

measurement equipment is only for the benefit of the seller in measuring the

quantity of the gas supplied would not be correct. The GSA is an agreement

reflecting mutual rights and obligations between the seller and the purchaser.

Both have a vital interest in ensuring the correct recording of the quantity of gas

supplied. Additionally, delivery of gas in a safe and regulated manner, enabled by

the SKID equipment, is an essential component of the GSA. The SKID equipment

subserves the contractual rights of both the seller and the purchaser of gas.

Indeed, without the SKID equipment there would be no gas supply agreement. In

fact, in the GSA, the buyer has also provided a warranty to ensure that the

“Buyer’s Facilities” remain technically and operationally compatible with the

“Seller’s Facilities”, both of which include the ‘measurement equipment’. This

warranty would not have been provided if the measurement equipment was not of

‘use’ to the buyer. The equipment is thus a vital ingredient of the agreement

towards protecting the mutual rights of the parties and in ensuring the fulfilment of

their reciprocal obligations as seller and buyer in regulating the supply of gas. As

an incident of regulating supply, it determines the correct quantity of gas that is

supplied. The obligation to supply, install and maintain the equipment is cast

upon the seller as an incident of control and possession being with the seller.
30
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
applies precisely in a situation where the use of the goods

by a person is not accompanied by control and possession. ‘Use’ in the context of

SKID equipment postulates the utilization of the equipment for the purpose of

fulfilling the purpose of the contract.
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
does not require

exclusivity of use. The SKID equipment is an intrinsic element of the service

which is provided by the respondent, acting pursuant to the GSA, as a supplier of

natural gas to its buyers.
29         While interpreting the term ‘use’, the Tribunal in the impugned judgment

has relied on its decision in the case of
Meru Cab Company Pvt. Ltd. v.

Commissioner of Central Excise, Mumbai21 (“Meru Cab”
). Meru Cab involved

the transfer of a vehicle from a radio taxi operator to the driver, in turn to provide

a service to the passengers. We find that the reliance placed on Meru Cab is

misplaced as the factual context of the ‘use’ in the two cases is substantially

different. In present matter, the agreement to supply gas, and the measurement

equipment and pipelines only involves two parties - the respondent and the

ultimate customer. Having said that, we are not expressing any opinion on the

correctness of the decision in Meru Cab.
30         Thus, we are of the view that the supply of the pipelines and the

measurement equipment (SKID equipment) by the respondent, was of use to the

customers and is taxable under
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of the Finance Act 1994.
21
2016 (41) STR (444) (Tri-Mum).
31
31    Another aspect of the matter which requires to be set out is the contention

of the respondent that the gas connection charges are mainly in the nature of a

refundable security deposit which is returned to the customers in the event of the

connection being discontinued or terminated, depending on their usage, and are

not payment for a service provided by the respondent.
32    In the Show Cause Notice, the appellant stated that based on an

assessment of gas sale agreements and invoices, it found that the “gas

connection charges” were collected for “supply of pipes and measurement

equipment etc.”. The appellant also noted that the respondent had not issued any

deposit receipt for these charges nor had it mentioned that these charges are a

refundable amount in the invoices issued.
33    The respondent, in their reply dated 29 December 2009, stated that the

purpose of the collection of these charges was for safe-keeping of the meter by

the customers and the expense towards charges incurred on disconnection, if the

customer disconnects immediately after installation. The respondent stated that

according to the company policy, with respect to commercial and industrial

consumers, an amount for installation of equipment was collected depending on

the pressure of the gas and the size of the SKID equipment. Although these are

reflected as gas connection income, they are (according to the respondent)

mainly in the nature of refundable security deposits. In support of their argument

for industrial and commercial consumers, the respondent provided a copy of an

“internal note dated 13 July 2007” and a list of industrial customers to whom the
32
gas connection charges have been refunded. The internal note is extracted

below:
“Today we are supplying gas to more than 200 Industrial
           customers at Ahmedabad & Vadodara. We are collecting Gas
           Connection Charge upfront from the customers before
           commencing gas supplies based on the customer load profile
           (provided by customer).
Many of our customers have future expansion after
           commissioning of the unit which is not covered in existing
           meter connection. Further, few of the customers have also
           requested for termination of the GSAs due to various issues.
           In such cases, following amount shall be deducted from
           the Gas Connection Charges and balance shall be
           refundable.
(1) Upgradation of Load:
In this case the percentage of amount to be deducted
           shall be as follows: -
Period from Commencement            % of Amount to be
                                               deducted
                                               Earlier       New
                                                             Revised
           Upto 1 Year                         10%           20%

           Between 1st Year to 2nd Year        25%          50%

           Between 2nd Year to 3rd Year        50%          75%

           Between 3rd Year to 4th Year        75%          100%


           (2) Terminating of Agreement:
In this case the percentage of amount to be deducted shall be
           as follows:
Period from Commencement             % of Amount to be
                                                deducted
                                                Earlier       New
                                                              Revised
           Upto 1 Year                          10%           25%

           Between 1st Year to 2nd Year         85%          50%

           Between 2nd Year to 3rd Year         95%          75%
33
Between 3rd Year to 4th Year        95%         100%
                                                    (emphasis supplied)
The tabulation of the refund given to the industrial customers of the respondent

for 2008-09 is as follows:
34    The above data indicates that, contrary to the assertion of the respondent

that the amount collected as gas connection charges is refunded at the time of

discontinuation of the connection, the percentage which has been refunded to the
34
industrial customers has varied from case to case ranging from 25 per cent to

100 per cent. The Adjudicating Authority observed:
“…the gas connection charges are refunded, based on the
            number of years of gas supply, when the gas connection
            contract is discontinued. This clearly evidences that gas
            connection charges in most of the cases are not refunded
            completely. The said noticee not only earns interest on the
            gas connection charges but also earns income by retaining
            some portion of the gas connection charges at the time of
            discontinuance of the contract. This is a very strange kind of
            security deposit which is not only devoid of interest but also
            on maturity the principal amount gets reduced. Moreover, in
            reality it may never be refunded if the gas connection is not
            discontinued. I have also seen the “Internal Note dated
            13.7.2007” submitted by the said noticee along with his
            written submission as “Annexure-A” and I find that the amount
            to be deducted is 100% when there is “upgradation of load” or
            “termination of agreement” between 3rd year to 4th year. This
            clearly establishes that the liability of the said noticee to
            refund the said “Gas Connection Charges” is only upto a
            period of three years, after that no amount is to be refunded
            and it eventually becomes income of the said noticee.
Moreover, till the time the said amount is partially refunded it
            remains with the said noticee who is at liberty of using the
            same in whatever manner he wants to. I have seen the
            Annexure-B annexed with the written submission dated
            4.1.2010 and find that the gas connection charges are
            refunded to only 13 customers during the year 2008-09. This
            indicates that effectively, the gas connection charges once
            recovered from the customers remain with the said noticee
            and in cases where it is refunded then also some amount is
            retained by the said notice.”



35    With respect to the domestic consumers, the respondent, in their reply to

the Show Cause Notice, argued that under                   the PNGRB Network Tariff

Regulations 2008, entities such as the respondent are required to collect

refundable interest-free security deposits towards safe-keeping of the meter and

are to be refunded in full to the domestic PNG customer in case of a

disconnection. The respondent argued that the PNGRB Network Tariff
35
Regulations 2008 further provide that the amount collected as interest-free

refundable security deposit is to exist as a liability in their books of account. In

support of their contention, the respondent provided their Annual Report for the

financial year 2008-09 which depicts the performance in terms of income and

profitability. An extract of the report is provided below:
36
36    The above report provides that the respondent has treated an amount of

Rs. 5000/- per domestic consumer as refundable interest-free security deposit

amounting to Rs. 883.34 lacs. In assessing these rival contentions, the

Adjudicating Authority held that:
“…I find that the attempt of the said notice to align the
Finance Act, 1994
, with the Petroleum and Natural Gas
             Regulatory Board Regulations 2008, to determine the
             taxability of a taxable event is not acceptable and goes in
             vain. Taxability of a service is governed under
Section
             65(105)
of the Finance Act, 1994 and is not determined under
             any other Act or Regulations, unless and until the same is
             specifically provided in the definition given under
Section
             65(105)
of the Finance Act, 1994. The taxability of a service is
             also not determined by the manner in which the Books of
             Accounts are maintained….”
37    We find ourselves in agreement with the findings of the Adjudicating

Authority. The extent of the refund of gas connection charges collected from

industrial, commercial and domestic consumers by the respondent depends on

their usage. From the internal note dated 13 July 2007 and the tabulation of

customers provided above, it is evident that the percentage of funds refunded

varies from customer to customer, while the remaining amount is retained by the

respondent. In any case, as regards the domestic customers, no deposit receipts

have been provided and instead, the respondent has relied on the tabulation of

the refund of deposit to industrial consumers to support their contention. Thus,

the argument of the respondent that these gas connection charges collected from

industrial, commercial and domestic consumers constitute a refundable security

deposit is rejected.
37
38    Thus construed, we are of the view that the Adjudicating Authority was

correct in concluding that the buyer of gas is as interested as the seller in

ensuring and verifying the correct quantity of the gas supplied through the

instrumentality of the measurement equipment and the pipelines. Additionally, the

role of regulating pressure and ensuring the safety of supply of gas performed by

the measurement equipment is an essential aspect for the ‘use’ of the consumer.

The SKID equipment fulfils the description in
Section 65(105)(zzzzj)
of a taxable

service: service in relation “tangible goods” where the recipient of the service has

use (without possession or effective control) of the goods.

39    For the above reasons, we are of the view that the Tribunal was in error in

interfering with the findings and order of the Adjudicating Authority. The judgment

of the Tribunal shall accordingly stand set aside. The order of the Adjudicating

Authority is restored. The appeal is allowed in the above terms.


40    Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
…….………….…………………...........................J.
                                  [Dr. Dhananjaya Y Chandrachud]



                                 …….…………………………...............................J.
                                  [Indu Malhotra]



                                 …….…………………………...............................J.
                                  [K M Joseph]



New Delhi;
August 28, 2020.
38